The Project Gutenberg EBook of History of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints (Vol. 4), by Joseph Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Vol. 4)

Author: Joseph Smith

Editor: B. H. Roberts

Release Date: November 16, 2019 [EBook #60708]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF CHURCH LATTER-DAY SAINTS, VOL 4 ***




Produced by the Mormon Texts Project (http://mormontextsproject.org)






HISTORY

OF THE

CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST

OF

LATTER-DAY SAINTS

PERIOD I.

History of Joseph Smith, the Prophet,

By Himself.

Volume IV.

An Introduction and Notes

By

B. H. Roberts

Published by the Church.

Salt Lake City, Utah,

1908.

{III}



Table of Contents.

Volume IV.

CHAPTER I.

The Departure of the Twelve for England--Manifestation of God's Power
in Healing the Sick at Commerce.

The Prophet's Literary Methods.

Farewell to the Twelve.

The L. D. S. Hymn Book.

Administration to the Sick.

Discourses by the Brothers Pratt.

Prayer Meeting for the Sick.

Letter to Isaac Russell, reproving him for issuing Pretended
Revelations to the Saints.

Conference in New Jersey.

Progress of the Work in England.

The Prophet's Letter to Isaac Galland--Nauvoo Affairs.

Brigham Young Starts on his Mission.

Departure of Elders Young and Kimball from Nauvoo.

Items of Doctrine, The Prophet.

Minutes of Conference at Commerce, Illinois, October 6th, 7th and 8th,
1839.

Death of John Young, Brigham Young's Father.

Hardships of the Elders of the British Mission.

CHAPTER II.

The Prophet's Journey To Washington--The Petition Of The Saints To The
Congress Of The United States For Redress Of The Wrongs Inflicted Upon
Them In Missouri.

Departure of the Prophet for Washington.

Progress of the Twelve towards England.

Canadian Saints En Route for Nauvoo.

Elder Taylor Anointed in the Kirtland Temple.

Excerpt from Parley P. Pratt's Letter to the Prophet.

First Issue of the _Times and Seasons_.

The Elements Obey.

The Prophet's Adventure En Route to Washington.

The Saints' Petition to Congress. {IV}

CHAPTER III.

The Prophet's Efforts at Washington to Obtain Redress of Grievances for the
Saints--Affidavits on Missouri Affairs.

The Prophet's Letter to Hyrum Smith--Reporting State of Affairs at Washington.

Letter of the Prophet and Elias Higbee to the High Council at Nauvoo--Preliminary
Hearing of Grievances.

Brigham Young in New York.

Letter of Hyrum Smith to Parley P. Pratt--On Printing the Book of Mormon in New
York.

The Prophet in New Jersey.

Affidavit of Simon Carter on his Sufferings in Missouri.

Letter of Hyrum Smith to the Prophet and Judge Higbee.

Affidavit of William F. Cahoon--Missouri Wrongs.

Letter of C. Adams to the Prophet--Cause of the Saints before the Illinois
Legislature.

Law Suits to be Abandoned.

Extract from Elder Orson Pratt's Letter to his wife--Reporting Movements of the
Brethren in the Eastern States.

Letter from John B. Weber to the Prophet--On Supplementing the Latter's Effort to
Obtain Redress from Congress.

Affidavit of John M. Burke--Missouri Outrages.

Affidavit of John Lowry--Ditto.

Affidavit of Jedediah Owen--Ditto.

Affidavit of T. Alvord--Ditto.

Affidavit of William Hawk--Missouri Affairs.

Affidavit of Timothy B. Clark--Ditto.

Affidavit of Urban V. Stewart--Ditto.

Affidavit of John Smith--Ditto.

Affidavit of Samuel Smith--Ditto.

Affidavit of Daniel Avery--Ditto.

Affidavit of James Powell--Ditto.

Affidavit of John Smith--Ditto.

Affidavit of Smith Humphrey--Ditto.

Affidavit of Henry Root--Ditto.

Affidavit of Joseph Clark--Ditto.

Affidavit of Thomas D. Casper--Ditto.

Affidavit of Jesse W. Johnston--Ditto.

Affidavit of Owen Cole--Ditto.

Affidavit of Ezekiel Maginn--Ditto.

Affidavit of Addison Green--Ditto.

Affidavit of John P. Greene--Ditto.

Affidavit of Asahel A. Lathrop--Ditto.

Affidavit of Burr Riggs.

Affidavit of Simon P. Curtis.

Affidavit of Elisha H. Groves.

Affidavit of Jacob Foutz.

Affidavit of Frederick G. Williams.

Statement of James Sloan.

Affidavit of David Shumaker.

Affidavit of Levi Richards.

Affidavit of Gibson Gates.

Affidavit of David Pettigrew. {V}

CHAPTER IV.

Departure of the Prophet from Washington--Labors of Elias Higbee Before the
Senate Judiciary Committee--Report of the Committee.

Ministry of Brigham Young and George A. Smith at Richmond, New York.

Appointments in the British Mission.

Matthew S. Davis' Description of the Prophet, and a Report of his Washington
Discourse.

The Prophet's Interview with Van Buren and Calhoun.

Elias Higbee's Letter to the Prophet, Reporting Progress in the Cause of the Saints
before the Senate Committee.

Second Letter of Elias Higbee to the Prophet--Cause of the Saints before the Senate
Committee.

Third Letter of Elias Higbee to the Prophet--Cause of the Saints before the Senate
Committee.

The Fourth Letter of Elias Higbee to the Prophet--Announces that the Senate Committee's
Report will be Adverse to the Saints.

The Prophet En Route for Nauvoo.

Death of James Mulholland.

Report of the Senate Judiciary Committee on the Case of the Saints vs. Missouri.

CHAPTER V.

Affairs of the Saints before United States Senate--General Conference of the Church at
Nauvoo--Action of the Church with Reference to Senate Committee's Report--Mission to
Palestine.

Extract from the Minutes of the Iowa High Council.

Fifth Letter of Elias Higbee to the Prophet--The Affairs of the Saints at Washington.

Extract from Elder John Taylor's Letter--Affairs in British Mission.

Judge Elias Higbee's Course at Washington Approved.

Letter R. B. Thompson to Elias Higbee, Announcing Approval of the Church Authorities of the
Latter's Course at Washington.

Letter of Horace R. Hotchkiss to Sidney Rigdon and Joseph Smith, Jun.,--Inquiring Concerning
the Progress made before Congress.

Sixth Letter of Elias Higbee to the Prophet--Affairs of the Saints at Washington--Papers
Withdrawn.

Letter of Horace R. Hotchkiss to Joseph Smith, Jun.,--Offering Tract of Land for Sale.

Letter of Sidney Rigdon to the Prophet.

Arrival of Brigham Young and Associates in England.

Minutes of the General Conference of the Church. {VI}

CHAPTER VI.

Development Of The Work In England--The Palestine Mission--Postoffice
Name Changed From Commerce To Nauvoo.

Letter of Hon. Richard M. Young to Elias Higbee.

Orson Hyde's Credentials as a Missionary to Palestine.

Ordination of Willard Richards to the Apostleship.

Letter of Heber C. Kimball to the Saints of the United States--Affairs
of the British Mission.

Council Meeting of the Twelve in England--Hymn Book and the _Millennial
Star_ Projected.

Letter of Brigham Young to the Prophet.

Mission opened in Scotland--Orson Pratt.

Letter of Robert Johnstone to Senator Young--Postoffice Name Changed
from Commerce to Nauvoo.

Letter of Senator Young to Judge Elias Higbee--Postoffice Name, etc.

Letter of Wilford Woodruff to Don Carlos Smith--Success of Woodruff's
Ministry.

Letter of Elders Hyde and Page to the Prophet--Plans for the Palestine
Mission.

Letter of Brigham Young to the Prophet--Affairs of the British Mission.

Release of Elder Turley from Prison.

Letter of the Prophet to Elders Hyde and Page--Palestine Mission
Considered.

Letter of Willard Richards to the Editor of the _Millenial
Star_--Reporting Labors.

CHAPTER VII.

First Foreign Periodical Of The Church--The "Millennial Star"--The
Prophet Seeks Release From Secular Responsibilities.

The Beacon Hill Conference.

A Letter of Heber C. Kimball, _et al_., Recommending English Saints to
the Bishop of the Church.

Death of Bishop Partridge.

First Number of the _Millennial Star_.

The First Company of Saints from England.

Brigham Young's Dream.

Minutes of the Conference Held at Gadfield Elm Chapel, in
Worcestershire, England, June 14th, 1840.

Memorial of Joseph Smith, Jun., to the High Council of the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, June 18th, 1840.

Proceedings of the High Council on the Foregoing Memorial, June 20th,
1840.

Minutes of the Conference Held at Stanley Hill, Castle Froome,
Herefordshire, England, June 21st, 1840.

Carpenter's Hall.

Minutes of the High Council.

Letter of William W. Phelps--Confessing Errors Committed in Missouri.

Letter of Elders Orson Hyde and John E. Page to Presidents Joseph
Smith, Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Pleading for William W. Phelps.

{VII} Minutes of a Meeting of the Crooked Creek Branch of the Church.

Minutes of High Council at Nauvoo.

Reflections of the Prophet on the Action of Congress.

CHAPTER VIII.

Important Conference of the Church in England--Kidnapping of Brown and
Boyce by Missourians--Action of the Citizens of Nauvoo.

Conference of the Church in England.

A Council of Church Officers, Held at Manchester, England.

Extract from Elder Woodruff's Letter to the Editor of the _Millennial
Star_--Detailing Incidents of his Ministry.

Special Instruction for High Councils.

The First Missionary for Australia.

Kidnapping of Alanson Brown and Benjamin Boyce--Affidavit of Daniel H.
Wells.

Statement of James Allred.

Action of the Citizens of Nauvoo in the Matter of the Kidnapping of
Brown and Boyce by the Missourians.

Report of the Committee on Resolutions.

Memorial to Governor Carlin.

CHAPTER IX.

The Return of a Prodigal--Conditions in Kirtland--Progress of the Work
in Great Britain--The Coming of John C. Bennett--Australian Mission.

Extract of a Letter from Elder William Barratt.

The Prophet's Letter to William W. Phelps--Welcoming him back into the
Church.

Credentials of Elders Samuel Bent and George W. Harris.

The Prophet's Letter to Oliver Granger--Dealing Chiefly with affairs at
Kirtland.

Letter of John C. Bennett to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon--Announcing
his Intention to Join the Saints.

Letter of John C. Bennett to Messrs. Smith and Rigdon--Making Further
Tender of his Services to the Church.

Letter of the Prophet to Horace R. Hotchkiss--Rock River Lands and the
White Purchase.

Letter of John C. Bennett to Messrs. Smith and Rigdon--Expressing
Anxiety to be with the Saints.

A Voice from the Holy City--Rebuilding the Temple of Solomon--Recall of
the People of God to the Land of Judah.

Circular.

Extract of a Letter from Wilford Woodruff to the Editor of the
_Millennial Star_--Reporting Labors.

The Prophet's Letter to John C. Bennett--Bidding him Welcome to Nauvoo,
to partake of--Poverty.

Letter of John C. Bennett to Messrs. Smith and Rigdon--Announcing that
he will soon be in Nauvoo. {VIII}

CHAPTER X.

A Missouri Kidnapping--Continued Development of the Work in Great
Britain--The Death of Joseph Smith, Sen., First Patriarch of the Church.

Settlement of a Difficulty.

The Kidnapping of Benjamin Boyce, Mr. Brown, _et al_.

The Beginning of Open-air Meetings.

The Electric Telegraph.

An Address by the First Presidency to the Church.

Minutes of the High Council Meeting, at the Office of Joseph Smith,
Jun., Nauvoo, September 5th, 1840.

The Generosity of John Benbow.

Earthquake at Mount Ararat.

The Death of Joseph Smith, Sen.

Biography of Joseph Smith, Sen., Presiding Patriarch of the Church, by
the Prophet, his Son.

The Discourse of Elder Thompson at the Funeral of Joseph Smith, Sen.

CHAPTER XI.

Threatening Portents in the Actions of Missouri--General Conferences in
Nauvoo and England--The Doctrine of Priesthood.

Letter of Samuel Bent and George W. Harris to the Presidency--Reporting
Labors.

Letter of John E. Page to the Presidency, Reporting Progress of
Palestine Mission.

Extracts from Orson Hyde's Letter--Signs in the Heavens.

Elder Heber C. Kimball's Dream.

Minutes of the General Conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, held in Nauvoo, October 3d, 1840.

Report of the Presidency.

Minutes of a General Conference in England.

Minutes of a Council of the Twelve in England.

CHAPTER XII.

Progress of the Work in Great Britain--The Saints at Kirtland Reproved
for Their Course During the Missouri Persecutions--The Prophet's
Address to the Twelve and Saints in Great Britain.

Charge against Oliver Walker.

Minutes of the High Council.

Letter of Heber C. Kimball et al. to Messrs. Ebenezer {IX} Robinson and
Don Carlos Smith--Reporting Affairs in the British Mission.

"Remarkable Visions" by Orson Pratt.

Letter of Joseph and Hyrum Smith to the Saints in Kirtland--Reproving
the Saints for Neglect of their Brethren and Sisters During the
Missouri Persecutions.

An Epistle of the Prophet to the Twelve.

CHAPTER XIII.

Introduction of the Gospel in the Isle of Man--The Nauvoo Charter.

Mormonism in the Isle of Man.

Opposition to the Work in England.

Excommunication of Sidney Roberts.

Letter of Brigham Young to the Presidency, Detailing Movements of the
Mission in England.

Elder Taylor's Defense of the Work.

An Act to Incorporate the City of Nauvoo.

Of the Legislative Powers of the City Council.

Letter of John C. Bennett to the _Times and Seasons_--Announcing the
Passage of the Act Incorporating Nauvoo.

CHAPTER XIV.

Vale 1840--Enter 1841--List of Publications for and Against
the Church--Whereabouts of the Twelve Apostles--"Election and
Reprobation"--Proclamation to the Saints.

The Acquittal of R. D. Foster.

An Objector Put Down.

Brigham Young's Letter to the Prophet--Reporting Labors in England.

Election and Reprobation--by Brigham Young and Willard Richards.

A Proclamation of the First Presidency of the Church to the Saints
Scattered Abroad, Greeting.

CHAPTER XV.

Reconstruction of Church Affairs at Nauvoo--Revelation--Municipal
Organization of Nauvoo--Installation of Civic and Military Officers.

Reproof of John E. Page and Orson Hyde.

Revelation given to Joseph Smith at Nauvoo, January 19th, 1841.

Hyrum Smith Installed as Patriarch.

First Election of Municipal Officers in Nauvoo.

Joseph Smith made Sole Trustee of the Church.

{X} Nauvoo City Council Organized.

The Mayor's Inaugural Address.

Minutes of the Meeting which Organized the Nauvoo Legion.

Nauvoo Council Opened by Prayer.

The Echo Company.

Minutes of the London Conference.

Ordinance.

Missouri's "White-washing."

Legion Resolutions.

Resolution.

Ordinance.

An Act to Incorporate the Nauvoo House Association.

An Act to Incorporate the Nauvoo Agricultural and Manufacturing
Association in the County of Hancock.

Division of Nauvoo into Municipal Wards.

Ordinance on Religious Liberty in Nauvoo.

An Ordinance in Relation to Public Meetings.

Committee Report.

Appointment of City Officers.

Letter of Brigham Young to the Editor of the _Star_--On Family Prayer.

Appointment of Joseph Smith Lieutenant-General of the Nauvoo Legion.

Organization of the Lesser Priesthood at Nauvoo.

CHAPTER XVI.

The First Foreign Mission of the Church, 1837-1841.

History of the British Mission.

CHAPTER XVII.

Celebration of the Twelfth Anniversary of the Organization of the
Church--Order of Laying Corner-Stones of Temples--Council Meetings of
the Twelve in England.

Staffordshire Conference.

Union of Commerce and Nauvoo Plats.

Letter of Wilford Woodruff to Don C. Smith--Relating to Affairs in
England.

Minutes of a Council Meeting of the Twelve.

Council Meeting of the Twelve--Continued.

Council Meeting of the Twelve--Continued.

Twelfth Anniversary of the Organization of the Church.

Sidney Rigdon's Speech.

Conduct of the People.

Order of Laying Corner-stones of Temples.

Conference at Philadelphia.

Meeting of the Council of the Twelve in Manchester.

CHAPTER XVIII.

General Conference at Nauvoo--Epistle of the Twelve to the Saints in
England--Difference Between Baptists and Latter-Day Saints.

Minutes of the General Conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, held in Nauvoo, Illinois, on the 7th day of April,
One Thousand Eight Hundred and Forty-one.

Report of the First Presidency.

{XI} Letter of George A. Smith to the _Star_--Report of Labors.

Conference in New York City.

An Epistle of the Twelve Apostles to the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints in England, Scotland, Ireland, Wales, and the Isle of
Man, Greeting.

Difference Between the Baptists and Latter-day Saints, from the _North
Staffordshire Mercury_.

The Difference Between the Baptists and the Former-day Saints.

CHAPTER XIX.

Organization of the Nauvoo Legion--Notable Persons at Nauvoo--The
Prophet's Sermon on Individual Responsibility for Sin and the Doctrine
of Election.

The Twelve Embark for Home.

Changes in the Iowa Stake.

Organization of the Legion.

New Burying Ground for Nauvoo.

Nauvoo Legion Affairs.

Letter of the Prophet to the _Times and Seasons_--Visit of Notable
Persons to Nauvoo.

The Prophet's Discourse.

Minutes of a Conference in London.

Arrival of _Rochester_ at New York.

The Healing of one who was Deaf.

Rowdyism in New York Harbor.

Mob Violence in England.

Conference in Kirtland.

Letter of the Presidency to the Saints--Concentration at Nauvoo.

Legion Affairs.

CHAPTER XX.

Arrest of the Prophet on Demand of Missouri--Trial at Monmouth--The
Acquittal.

The Prophet's Visit with Governor Carlin.

The Arrest of the Prophet.

Apostles in New Jersey.

News of the Prophet's Arrest Reaches Nauvoo.

The Prophet at Monmouth.

The Trial.

Honorable Conduct of Counsel.

Judge Douglas--Ditto.

A Letter from the Editor of the _Times and Seasons_ to that Journal,
Giving an Account of the Trial at Monmouth.

The Prophet Set Free.

CHAPTER XXI.

The Mission to Jerusalem--Progress of Orson Hyde in His Journey.

Elder John E. Page--a Laggard.

Letter from Elder Orson Hyde to Presidency Joseph Smith--Recounting
Incidents of his Journey en route for Jerusalem.

Elder Hyde's Letter to Rabbi Hirschell.

Conclusion of Elder Hyde's Letter to the Prophet. {XII}

CHAPTER XXII.

Sundry Events at Nauvoo and Throughout the World--The Mission of the
Twelve Noted by the Prophet.

Press Misrepresentations.

Imprisonment of Theodore Curtis.

Extract from a Letter in the _Juliet Courier_--Describing the Prophet's
Trial at Monmouth, and Affairs at Nauvoo.

Revelation given to Joseph Smith, in the House of Brigham Young, in
Nauvoo City, July 9th, 1841.

Liquor Selling Licensed in Nauvoo.

Manna Rain in Aleppo.

Press Falsehoods.

Letter of Elder Orson Hyde to President Smith--Detailing Events while
en route to Jerusalem.

Death of Senator Little.

General Funeral Sermon.

The Prophet's Account of the Mission of the Twelve.

Letter of William Smith to President Smith--Land Transactions.

CHAPTER XXIII.

The Death of Don Carlos Smith--His Life and Labors--Special Conference
at Nauvoo.

The Death of Don Carlos Smith.

The Visits of Don Carlos to Liberty Prison.

His Ministrations to the Sick.

Personal Appearance of Don Carlos Smith.

The Iowa Stake of Zion.

New Mission Movement Planned.

General Orders, Nauvoo Legion.

Depression of the Times.

Visit of the Sac and Fox Indians to Nauvoo.

Minutes of a Special Conference at Nauvoo--Important Action in Relation
to the Twelve.

CHAPTER XXIV.

Hotchkiss Land Purchase Trouble--Death's Harvest, Oliver Granger,
Robert B. Thompson--Important Action Relating to the Twelve--The
Mission in Fox Island.

The Founding of Warren.

Letter of Horace R. Hotchkiss to Joseph Smith--Land Affairs in Nauvoo.

Letter of the Prophet to Horace R. Hotchkiss--Nauvoo Land Transactions.

Location and Character of the Hotchkiss Lands.

Death of Oliver Granger.

An Epistle of the Twelve Apostles to the Saints Scattered Abroad Among
the Nations, Greeting.

Death of Robert B. Thompson.

Biography of Robert Blashel Thompson.

{XIII} Minutes of a Council Meeting of the Twelve Apostles at the House
of Brigham Young, Nauvoo.

Changes of Officers in the Legion.

Changes Among the Civil Officers of Nauvoo.

The Prophet on Medicine.

A Shower of "Flesh."

British-Chinese War.

Extract from Legion Minutes.

The Coming of Edward Hunter to Nauvoo.

Bitterness of D. W. Kilbourn.

Hitch Council Resolution.

Lumber for the Temple.

The Work on Fox Island.

Sentence Rendered by Pontius Pilate, Acting Governor of Lower Galilee,
Stating that Jesus of Nazareth shall Suffer Death on the Cross.

CHAPTER XXV.

The General Conference of the Church at Nauvoo--Doctrinal Sermon by the
Prophet--Baptism for the Dead--Angels and Ministering Spirits--Epistle
of the Twelve Reviewing Status of the Church.

Suit against Geo. M. Hinkle.

Minutes of the General Conference of the Church held at Nauvoo.

Minutes of a Meeting of the Council of the Twelve.

Copy of a Letter to Smith Tuttle, Esq.,--The Hotchkiss.

Land Troubles.

An Epistle of the Twelve Apostles, to the Brethren Scattered Abroad on
the Continent of America, Greeting.

CHAPTER XXVI.

Affairs in Kirtland and Nauvoo--Epistle of the Twelve to the Saints
in the British Islands--Orson Hyde's Prayer on the Mount of Olives,
Dedicating the Holy Land Preparatory to the Return of the Tribes of
Israel.

Extract from Orson Hyde's Letter.

Minutes of Conference held at Lima.

Extract of a Letter from Parley P. Pratt--Emigration of Saints, and
Status of the Work in England.

Copy of a Letter of Attorney from Joseph Smith, "Sole Trustee-in-Trust
for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," to Reuben
McBride, of Kirtland, Ohio.

Excerpt of Hyrum Smith's Letter to the Saints in Kirtland--Disapproving
of Certain Plans for Building up Kirtland.

The Nuisance.

Reproof of William O. Clark.

Dedication of the Baptismal Font.

An Ordinance Concerning Vagrants and Disorderly Persons.

An Epistle of the Twelve Apostles to the Saints Scattered Abroad in
England, {XIV} Scotland, Ireland, Wales, and the Isle of Man, and the
Eastern Continent, Greeting.

Minutes of a Meeting at Ramus, Illinois--Alanson Brown et al.,
Disfellowshiped.

Baptisms for the Dead.

Elder Orson Hyde's Letter--His Prayer of Dedication on the Mount of
Olives.

Prayer of Orson Hyde on the Mount of Olives.

CHAPTER XXVII.

Official Denunciation of Thieves at Nauvoo--The Moral Law of the
Church--Abandonment of Ramus as a Stake of Zion--Baptism for the Dead,
an Epistle.

Affidavit of Hyrum Smith--Denouncing Theft.

The Prophet's Estimate of the Book of Mormon.

The Prophet's Denunciation of Thieves.

Conference in New York.

Warning of the Twelve Apostles against Thieves.

Thieves.

Revelation.

Conference at Ramus.

The Prophet Proof Reads Book of Mormon.

Letter of the Prophet to Esquires Browning and Bushness--Payment of
Notes.

The Prophet's Letter to Mr. Hotchkiss--Commerce Lands.

The Prophet's Difficulties in Writing the Annals of the Church.

Anti-Mormonism at Warsaw.

Further Trouble at Warsaw.

Baptism for the Dead. An Epistle of the Twelve Apostles to the Saints
of the Last Days.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

Kirtland vs. Nauvoo--Political Attitude of the People of Nauvoo
Declared--Publications Mormon and Anti-Mormon For 1841--Close of the
Year.

Decision in the Case of Almon W. Babbitt and Kirtland.

Affairs at Ramus.

Expressions of Gratitude to James Gordon Bennett and the _New York
Herald_.

Minutes of a Meeting of the Twelve in the House of the Prophet.

The Prophet on the Attitude of the Saints in Politics.

The Prophet's Letter to Edward Hunter--Business Affairs at Nauvoo.

Revelation to John Snyder and Amos B. Fuller.

Revelation.

Work on Proclamation to Kings of the Earth.

Emigration Agency to England.

Xmas at Nauvoo, 1841.

Conference Minutes--New York and Maine.

Purpose of the Gift of Tongues.

Instructions to the Twelve.

Warren and Warsaw Affairs.

A Prophecy Respecting Warsaw.

Mormon Literature (_pro et con_) 1841.

CHAPTER XXIX.

The Opening of the Year 1842--Whereabouts of the Twelve
Apostles--Correspondence of Elder Hyde From Trieste--Report of High
Council on Affairs in Nauvoo--Events and Conditions in the British
Mission.

Sundry Labors of the Prophet.

The Prophet's Letter to Edward Hunter--Reports Opening of the New Store.

Rejoicing of the Prophet.

Tithing and Consecrations for the Temple of the Lord.

Book of Mormon Corrections.

Meeting with the Twelve.

Highly Interesting from Jerusalem.

Excerpts from Elder Hyde's Letters.

The Prophet's Letter to Isaac Galland--On Settlement of Accounts.

Isaac Galland Affair.

Seventies' Quorum Affairs.

Revelation.

Report of High Council Committee.

Letter of G. Walker to Elder Brigham Young et al.--Affairs in England
Since Departure of the Apostles.

CHAPTER XXX.

Emigration of the Saints From England to Nauvoo--The Book of Abraham

Emigration.

Death of Laura Phelps.

Debates in Nauvoo.

Vindication of Daniel Wood.

Letter of Alfred Cordon to Joseph Smith--Reporting Affairs in England.

Confidence in the Nauvoo Charter.

Announcement of the Trustee-in-Trust for the Church Respecting Work on
the Temple.

An Additional Word from the Twelve.

Letter of the Prophet to an Unknown Brother on Tithing.

Note of Robert Pierce--Expressing Satisfaction at Financial Settlement.

The Book of Abraham.

CHAPTER XXXI.

The Wentworth Letter.

CHAPTER XXXII.

The Bennett-Dyer Correspondence--The Prophet's Discourse on the Subject
of the Resurrection, and the Salvation of Children--Epistle of the
Twelve to the Saints in England Concerning Their Emigration to America.

Tax Controversy.

Attempted Settlement with Gilbert Granger,

Book of Abraham Fac-similes.

{XVI} Letter of the Prophet to John C. Bennett--on Bennett's
Correspondence Anent Slavery.

Correspondence Between Dr. C. V. Dyer and General J. C. Bennett.

Letter of John C. Bennett to Joseph Smith--Anent the Dyer-Bennett
Correspondence.

Letter of the Prophet to Edward Hunter--Business Transactions.

Extract from the Legion Minutes.

Extract from High Council Minutes.

The Prophet Becomes Editor of the _Times and Seasons_.

Honor Among Thieves.

Origin of the Female Relief Society.

The Prophet's Sermon on Life and Death; the Resurrection and the
Salvation of Children.

An Epistle of the Twelve to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints in its Various Branches and Conferences in Europe, Greeting.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

A Mason's Estimate of Nauvoo and the Prophet--Organization of the
Female Relief Society--"Try the Spirits"--The Prophet's Editorial.

Nauvoo and the Mormons.

Extract from a Letter from Elder E. P. Maginn, Salem, Massachusetts.

Organization of the Relief Society.

Character of the Mormon Women.

Mission of John Snyder.

Synopsis of the Prophet's Sermon on Baptism for the Dead.

Letter of Lorenzo D. Barnes to Parley P. Pratt--Reporting Labors.

Synopsis of the Prophet's Remarks to the Female Relief Society.

"Try the Spirits"--The Prophet's Editorial in the _Times and Seasons_.

CHAPTER XXXIV.

Special Conference of the Church at Nauvoo--The Prophet's Reproof of
the Wicked--Epistle of the Twelve to the Saints in Kirtland--Status of
the Church.

The Thirteenth Anniversary of the Organization of the Church.

Conference Minutes. Special Conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, City of Nauvoo, April 6th, 1842.

Remarks of the Prophet at the Funeral of Ephraim Marks.

Synopsis of Remarks of the Prophet--Reproof of all Wickedness.

A Meteor Fall.

Council Meeting with the Twelve.

Council Meeting with the Twelve.

An Epistle of the Twelve to the Saints in America, Greeting.

Military Appointments.

CHAPTER XXXV.

The General Bankrupt Law--The Doctrine of Baptism for the Dead--The
Prophet's Address to the Female Relief Society--The Keys of the
Priesthood and the Nauvoo Temple.

The Bankrupt Law.

The Prophet Forced into Bankruptcy.

Baptism for the Dead.

Cause of the Prophet's Insolvency.

James Arlington Bennett Honored.

Repast Militaire.

The Rights and Privileges of Women in the Church Remarks of the Prophet
to the Relief Society.

The Temple.



Introduction to Volume IV.

Five subjects may be said to form the outline of the chief events
detailed in this volume of the History of the Church _the Founding of
Nauvoo; the Appeal of the Church to the National Government for redress
of wrongs suffered in Missouri; the Mission of the Twelve Apostles to
the British Isles; the Mission of Orson Hyde to Palestine; and the
Doctrinal Development of the Church_.

_Preliminary Considerations_.

Preliminary to a brief consideration of these several subjects, I
desire to say a word as to the reception of the Latter-day Saints by
the people of Illinois, and the conditions prevailing in that state at
the time of their arrival. A knowledge of these conditions is necessary
to the understanding of this whole Illinois period of the History of
the Church.

Much has been made of the hospitality which the people of Illinois
extended to the Latter-day Saints at the time of their expulsion from
Missouri. A writer in the _American Historical Magazine_ for July,
1906, says: "To the latter state [Illinois] they [the Saints] went
in 1839, and were received with such open-armed hospitality as only
a very generous and liberty-loving people can extend to those whom
they honestly believe to be suffering from a wrongful oppression.
The conduct of the Saints in five years turned this feeling of
extraordinarily deep-seated sympathy, inducing great practical
charities, into a feeling of very bitter hatred, threatening to break
into mob violence." Far be it from me to depreciate the kindness of
those who extended a helping hand to the Saints in the hour of their
distress. Stripped and sorely wounded they fled from the violence
of Missouri militia-mobs, and found for a time a peaceful asylum in
Illinois. Many were the acts of disinterested kindness extended to
them by the people in the western part of that state; and every such
act I am sure was and is remembered, both by those who were the direct
recipients of such acts of kindness and by their grateful descendants.
But is responding to the calls of humanity so rare a thing in a
Christian state, that it must needs be regarded as so exceptional in
this case? Such was the condition of the Saints as they fled from
Missouri, such the injustice to which they had been subjected in that
state, that their situation would have appealed to the generosity of
savages, how much more, then, to a civilized and Christian community!
And then, speaking of this reception of the Saints _en masse_, by
Illinois, and leaving out of consideration {XX} for the moment--since
they have already been acknowledged--the individual acts of kindness
bestowed upon the exiles, was this reception of the Saints by Illinois
wholly disinterested? Were there not benefits which the Saints could
bestow upon the state in return for the heartiness of the reception
given? Would it not have been, under all the circumstances, the gravest
of blunders for Illinois to have refused asylum to these exiles? Is it
to be presumed that the public men of western Illinois were so blind to
their own interests as not to see in these twelve or fifteen thousand
people a mighty advantage to the state? It is true they were poor
in this world's goods; but they were rich in labor-power, and their
reputation for habits of sobriety and of industry had preceded them.
Here were thousands of husbandmen seeking lands. Illinois had thousands
of acres of unoccupied lands awaiting husbandmen. How shortsighted and
unstatesman-like it would have been for the men of Illinois not to have
welcomed these settlers into their state? With half an eye it is easy
to see that the benefits of this reception of the exiled Mormons by
Illinois is not by any means a one-sided affair; and it would be doing
an injustice to the intelligence of the people of that state to suppose
they were blind to these advantages. This will more fully appear when
other conditions are taken into account. Illinois has an area of 56,650
square miles; and at the time of the advent of the Saints in that state
a white population of less than four hundred thousand, [1] as against
a present population of five and a half millions. [2] It will be seen,
then, that in 1839, the year of the advent of the Saints into that
state, Illinois was very sparsely settled, and needed above all things
for her development and prosperity, people to subdue her wilderness
and cultivate her rich lands, especially people desirous of making
homes, and becoming permanent citizens. Moreover, Illinois had recently
launched an extensive system of internal improvements by state aid.
This system included the construction of 1,300 miles of railroads in
the state, besides provisions for the improvement of the navigation of
the Kaskaskia, Illinois, Great and Little Wabash, and Rock rivers. Also
the construction of a canal from Lake Michigan to the navigable waters
of the Illinois river, a distance of more than one hundred miles (from
Chicago to Peru). To carry out this system of internal improvements the
state legislature of 1836-7 had appropriated the sum of $12,000,000;
and to raise the money state bonds were placed on the stock markets of
the eastern states and in England. It is not my province here even to
note the wisdom or unwisdom of this policy of wholesale state aid for
these internal improvements; let the wisdom {XXI} or unwisdom be what
it may, these conditions emphasized Illinois' demand for population,
and again makes it evident that it would have been the height of folly
for the people of that state to do other than give hearty welcome to
this body of population so rich in labor-power; so potent in wealth
producing energy.

Another thing to be noted is the fact that about the time of the advent
of the Saints into Illinois, political parties were just taking form in
that state, and it is within the record of facts in the case, as well
as of great likelihood, that a desire for obtaining political advantage
was at least in the background of motives prompting the heartiness of
the reception given to the Saints.

Illinois was admitted into the Union in 1818, but it is a matter of
common knowledge that in the early years of her history as a state,
her officers were elected not on any well defined political party
principles, but chiefly on the strength of the personality of the
candidates and the special things for which they individually stood.
Indeed, it was not until 1830 that anything like party lines were
drawn in the state, and that it became a battle ground for the two
great national parties, Whigs and Democrats. It was a committee from
a Democratic party organization in Quincy, Illinois, that took the
initiative in welcoming the Saints into the state, and strive how one
may, it is difficult to think there was not some political advantage
sought through this action. On the other hand, the Whigs were not slow
to urge upon the incoming exiles that it was a Democratic state and a
Democratic administration in that state which had not only permitted,
but had really ordered their expulsion from Missouri, and that
doubtless the injustice they had suffered was owing to Democratic ideas
of the administration of government. Nor were there wanting those among
the Saints who were willing to believe that such was the case. Indeed,
Joseph Smith, the Prophet, found it necessary to gently reprove some of
his people who were rapidly making the question of their expulsion from
Missouri a political party question in Illinois. This effort to win the
Saints to one political party or the other, continued to be a factor
in their affairs so long as they remained at Nauvoo. It was owing to
this rivalry for their support that doubtless made it possible for the
Saints to obtain larger grants of power for their city government, and
greater political privileges and influence in the State than otherwise
could have been obtained by them. It also was this rivalry for their
favor, as the events in this, but more especially in the succeeding
volume will prove, that made them alternately fulsomely flattered and
heartily disliked; fawningly courted, and viciously betrayed.

A knowledge of these circumstances, I say, is essential to the right
understanding of the Nauvoo period of the Church's history.

{XXII} _The Founding of Nauvoo_.

The founding of the city of Nauvoo was an event, the interest of which
extends beyond the people immediately concerned in it. It was a unique
movement in its way, and may yet suggest a policy in reference to the
government of large cities from which great benefits may arise. Very
naturally after the experiences of the Mormon people in Missouri, the
Prophet was anxious to environ them with conditions that would insure
protection to the community, hence for Nauvoo he secured as large
concessions of political power as it was possible to obtain, and an
examination of the Nauvoo charter proper with its attendant charters
providing as they did for an independent educational system, from
common schools to a University; an independent military organization
with a lieutenant-general as its commander; [3] a large grant of
commercial as well as municipal power, demonstrates how well he
succeeded. Commenting upon the charter immediately after its passage
by the state legislature had been formally announced, he said: "The
City Charter of Nauvoo is of my own plan and device. I concocted it for
the salvation of the Church, and on principles so broad, that every
honest man might dwell secure under its protective influence without
distinction of sect or party." [4] On another occasion when defending
the right of the city to issue writs of habeas corpus, even against
processes of the state, he held: "If there is not power in our charter
and courts, then there is not power in the State of Illinois nor in
the Congress or Constitution of the United States; for the United
States gave unto Illinois her Constitution or Charter, and Illinois
gave unto Nauvoo her charters conceding unto us our vested rights
which she has no right or power to take from us. All the power there
was in Illinois she gave to Nauvoo. * * * The municipal court has all
the power to issue and determine writs of habeas corpus within the
limits of this state that the {XXIII} Legislature can confer. This city
has all the power that the State courts have, and was given by the
same authority--the legislature. * * * The charter says that the City
Council shall have power and authority to make, ordain, establish, and
execute such ordinances not repugnant to the Constitution of the United
States, or of this State, as they may deem necessary for the peace,
benefit and safety of the inhabitants of said city. [5] And also that
the Municipal Court shall have power to grant writs of habeas corpus in
all cases arising under the ordinances of the City Council. The City
Council have passed an ordinance 'that no citizen of this city shall be
taken out of this city by any writ without the privilege of a writ of
habeas corpus.' There is nothing but what we have power over, except
where restricted by the Constitution of the United States. 'But,' says
the mob, 'what dangerous powers!' Yes--dangerous, because they will
protect the innocent and put down mobocrats. There is nothing but
what we have power over, except where restricted by the Constitution
of the United States. * * * If these powers are dangerous, then the
Constitution of the United States, and of this State are dangerous; but
they are not dangerous to good men; they are only so to bad men who are
breakers of the laws. * * * The lawyers themselves acknowledge that we
have all power granted us in our charters, that we could ask for--that
we had more power than any other court in the State; for all other
courts were restricted while ours was not."

Such views in relation to an ordinary municipal government would
unquestionably be stamped as preposterous. No such powers as are here
claimed are accorded to ordinary city governments in Illinois or any
other of the states of the American Union. What then may be said of
the Prophet's claims in respect to the municipal powers of Nauvoo?
Nothing in way of defense, except that Nauvoo was _not_ an ordinary
municipality; that Joseph Smith had sought for extraordinary grants of
power for the city of Nauvoo and had obtained them; that his personal
experiences and the experiences of his people, both in Ohio and
Missouri, had taught him the necessity of having officers charged with
the duty of administering government wherein his people were concerned,
who were friendly disposed and whose interests were largely identical
with those of the Saints: that the things which both the Prophet and
his people had suffered justified both him and them in seeking for
and obtaining such power as had been conferred by charters upon the
city of Nauvoo; that the Prophet was wholly within the lines of right
conduct when he invoked the municipal powers in his own protection
{XXIV} against the aggressions of his old enemies in Missouri and his
new betrayers in Illinois. But whether the legislature of Illinois was
fully aware of the extraordinary powers they were conferring upon the
city of Nauvoo, or being aware of the import of their action the party
in control of the legislature was willing to grant the extraordinary
powers in the hope of currying political favor with the Saints, may not
now be determined; but in any event these extraordinary powers were
granted; and wittingly or unwittingly a "city-state" had practically
been established within the state of Illinois. Nothing short of this
descriptive term can adequately set forth the municipal government
of Nauvoo. It seems to be an unconscious reversion. In an incipient
way, to the "city-states" or "city-republics" of the old Greek
confederations; or the "free-towns" of medieval times, when the cities
were more potent than nations in commerce and even in politics. Whether
or not the state courts of Illinois and United States courts would have
sustained the Nauvoo charters if the matter of their validity had been
referred to them for adjudication, may not be determined; but one can
scarcely suppress the thought that the likelihood is that they would
not have been sustained; on the contrary they would have been most
likely declared anomalous to our system of government as it then stood,
and now stands. But certainly if the experiment of such a municipal
government had not been interrupted in its progress, it might have been
an instructive object lesson in the government of cities; and even as
it is, the founding of Nauvoo, the "city-state," suggests an important
idea which may work out great practical reforms in municipal government
in our country.

The founders of our Government dealt with conditions that were very
simple in comparison with the complexity of the conditions which
government in its various forms, municipal, state and national, is
confronted with today. The Municipal problems which now vex the
people had not then arisen above the horizon of their experience. The
American commonwealths of the early decades of the nineteenth century
were practically rural commonwealths. At the time of Washington's
inauguration (1789) the population of New York was but thirty-three
thousand; Philadelphia forty-two thousand; Boston but eighteen
thousand; Baltimore thirteen thousand; Brooklyn one thousand six
hundred, and more village than town. Now compare these cities with
their present population. New York has a population of over four
millions; [6] Philadelphia a population of one and a half millions; [7]
Boston more than half {XXV} a million; [8] Baltimore over five hundred
thousand; [9] Brooklyn is absorbed in New York, but as a borough of
the larger city it has a population of nearly one and a half millions;
[10] Chicago, which in 1840 had but four thousand inhabitants, much
smaller than Nauvoo, has now a population of more than two millions;
[11] St. Louis which in 1840 had a population of but 16,469, has now a
population of three quarters of a million. [12] Nothing like the growth
of urban population within the United States during the last fifty
years has been known in the history of the world, and it has brought to
the inhabitants of these cities problems undreamed of by the founders
of our government. Every year discloses more and more distinctly the
fact that between these condensed communities and the town, village,
and rural population of the states in which they are located, there are
very distinct interests and governmental problems of widely differing
character. The differences which justify distinct local governments
in the state of New York and the peninsula of Florida are not more
insistent than the differences between the great commercial city of New
York and the state of the same name. Without entering upon elaborate
discussion of these questions (a discussion which is foreign to the
character of this writing) I venture the suggestion that separate and
complete state governments for our large cities, or the elevation of
them into what I have called "city-states," such as Nauvoo was, in
an incipient way, will be the solution to most of the problems of
municipal government in our very large cities. It would greatly enlarge
in them the governmental powers essential to their more perfect peace,
security, and prosperity. Also it would separate them from embroilment
in those questions of the state governments under which they are now
located, and in which they have so little interest--often indeed,
there is even sharp conflict of interests, engendering bitterness
and strife which hinders progress for both city and state. Besides,
granting complete statehood to our larger cities would be but a proper
recognition of the right of those great aggregations of citizens with
their varied industries, their immense wealth and distinct interests,
to that measure of influence in our national affairs which their
numbers and intelligence and interests justly demand.

{XXVI} _The Appeal of the Church to the National government for Redress
of Wrongs Suffered in Missouri_.

The Prophet Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Judge Elias Higbee were
chosen as the committee to present to the National Congress the
petition of the Saints for a redress of their grievances, suffered in
Missouri. This journey to the nation's Capital was of importance quite
apart from the immediate purpose for which it was undertaken; namely,
it brought the Prophet in contact with the leading statesmen of the
United States. While in Washington, he was brought in contact with
and interviewed such men as Henry Clay, John C. Calhoun, President
Martin Van Buren, different members of the Cabinet, Senators, and
Representatives. Such contact enabled him to take new measurements,
not only of a different class of men from those with whom he had been
accustomed to associate, but new measurements of himself by comparison
and contrast of himself with those leading spirits of the nation.
Comparisons which could not result otherwise than in advantage to
him; and I think it must be conceded by all students of the Prophet's
character, especially to those who have been at all close observers of
its development, that after this trip to Washington, which afforded the
above noted opportunities of comparison and contrast, the Prophet's
growth was immeasurably greater than at any time before that journey.

In some respects however it was unfortunate that the Prophet was not
more cosmopolitan in his training and in his views of life on the
occasion of this visit to the nation's capital; for lack of such
training and views of life led him to the formation of rather hasty
judgments as to the character of our nation's public men at that time.
He undoubtedly had sticking to him as yet, some of the prejudices of
his New England and New York sectional training; and at the time of
his visit the spirit of the public men of the nation at Washington
was largely influenced by the Southern character and spirit. Bourbon
Democracy was at its height. The gentlemen of the South with their
extreme notions of chivalry and polite deportment, predominated. In
those days men were held to strict account for their manner of address
one to another. An improper word, a slight, magnified into an insult,
meant a challenge to mortal combat on "the field of honor," and this
sense of personal responsibility for utterances begot, no doubt, an
extreme politeness in personal deportment which seemed puerile to
those reared in another atmosphere and influenced by other sentiments
than those which resulted from education in the South. Joseph Smith's
judgment upon manners and customs in Washington, was doubtless New
England's judgment upon Southern customs with which it had no patience,
much less sympathy. It is only from these considerations that the
rather harsh {XXVII} judgment of the Prophet in relation to conditions
in Washington can be properly understood.

Relative to the business upon which this committee visited Washington,
it should be said that Sidney Rigdon failed to participate in it at
all, in consequence of an illness which befell him on his journey,
and hindered him from reaching Washington until the business was
practically settled. A short stay in Washington convinced the Prophet
that nothing was to be expected in the way of obtaining a redress of
grievances for his people from the very cautious politicians then
in control of the government, all of whom were anxious, apparently,
to palliate the actions of Missouri with reference to the Saints,
for the sake of retaining her political influence on their side; and
also because of a prevailing inclination to a strict construction of
the powers of the general government in its relations to the states.
The Prophet therefore left Washington to preach the Gospel for a
short time in New Jersey and Philadelphia, after which he returned
to Nauvoo, leaving Judge Elias Higbee to urge consideration of the
petition of the Saints which had been referred to the Senate committee
on Judiciary, with what result is made known in detail in the body of
this volume of the history. It is sufficient here to say that the net
result of the Committee's deliberations was simply to recommend that
the Saints appeal for a redress of their wrongs to the United States
District Court having jurisdiction in Missouri, or they could, if they
saw proper, "apply to the justice and magnanimity of the State of
Missouri--an appeal which the committee feel justified in believing
will never be made in vain by the injured or oppressed."--(Sic!)

This suggestion to take their case to the United States Courts was
never acted upon by the Saints, nor does it appear in what manner it
would have been practicable for them to do so. True it is expressly
provided in the Constitution that "The Judicial power of the United
States shall extend to all cases in law and equity, arising under this
Constitution, the laws of the United States, and treaties made, or
which shall be made, under their authority; to controversies between
two or more states; between a state and citizens of another state;
between citizens of different states; between citizens of the same
state," etc. [13] The case of the Saints would fall either under the
clauses in the above quotation respecting controversies arising between
a state (Missouri) and citizens of another state (the Saints, now
citizens, of Illinois); or "between citizens of different states," the
Saints, citizens of Illinois, and their former persecutors, citizens of
Missouri. In considering the question under the first clause it must be
remembered that the eleventh amendment to the Constitution (declared in
force 1798) provides that {XXVIII} "The Judicial power of the United
States shall not be construed to extend to any suit in law or equity,
commenced or prosecuted against one of the United States by citizens of
another state, or by citizens or subjects of any foreign state." It is
held that "the power as well as the dignity of a state would be gone if
it could be dragged into court by a private plaintiff." [14]

The Supreme Court in the case Chisholm _vs_. the State of Georgia, had
decided (1793) that an action did lie against the State of Georgia at
a suit of a private plaintiff. The state however refused to appear,
whereupon the Supreme Court proceeded, a year later, to give judgment
against her by default in case she should not appear and plead before
a day; whereupon there arose such a storm of protest, not only in
Georgia, but in the other states as well, that the eleventh amendment
was adopted exempting a state from being sued in the courts of the
United States by citizens of another state, or by citizens subjects
of any foreign state. Moreover, states are not suable in any event
except with their consent; [15] and if a state waive its immunity, it
may attach any conditions it pleases to its consent. [16] Under these
circumstances it is not surprising that the Saints never attempted to
bring Missouri before the United States courts. They could only have
planted suit against the state by its consent, and if she consented,
then under such conditions as she might be pleased to attach to that
consent. Moreover, the Saints had the best of reasons for believing
that Missouri would never consent.

As to suing their persecutors as individuals before the United States
courts, as citizens of one state suing citizens of another, it is
only necessary to remind the reader of the insuperable difficulties
attending upon that procedure to convince him of the futility of such
action. The expensiveness of the undertaking, and the extreme poverty
of the exiles alone would be sufficient to bar such an undertaking;
for every one knows how bitterly hard it is for the poor to set the
judicial machinery of organized society in motion in their favor. Then
there was the evident conspiracy entered into by the mobs of Missouri
to defeat the ends of justice in respect of the Saints: mobs which an
unfriendly governor had converted into a state militia; to which that
same governor gave an order to expel from the state or exterminate the
entire people; under which order said mob-militia did expel from the
state some twelve thousand citizens, depriving them of their property
and liberty without due process of law; and afterwards the state
through its legislature sanctioned and applauded the actions of this
mob-militia for the part it had taken in causing said expulsion--though
attended by acts of {XXIX} unspeakable atrocity--by appropriating
200,000 dollars to meet the expenses of the mob-militia in carrying
out the governor's illegal orders. After these crimes against the
Constitution and laws of the state, against American institutions and
the civilization of the age--after all this, I say, it is not difficult
to understand how farcical would be any procedure before either the
state or the federal courts in Missouri. By acts of perjury, in order
to still further defeat the ends of justice and protect each other
from the penalties due to their crimes, it would have been easy for
the people of Missouri to defeat the ends of justice. And after having
committed the crimes of murder and robbery; after having unlawfully
expelled a whole people, numbering thousands, from their homes--of
which the despoilers were then possessed--it is not to be believed that
such characters would hesitate to suborn witnesses, commit perjury, or
hesitate to do any other thing, however criminal, in order to escape
the just punishment for their crimes.

The offense of the State of Missouri against the Saints was a denial
of political as well as of civil rights. She had in her treatment of
the Saints abdicated republican government. Her officers, including the
chief executive of the state had violated the Constitution of the state
in that they had entered into a wide-spread conspiracy to deprive the
Saints of their liberty and property without due process of law; and in
fact had deprived them of those rights by expelling them by force of
arms from the state.

These were the wrongs the Saints had endured; this the nature of the
crime of the state of Missouri against them, and it seems that for
these things which they suffered there could be found no remedy;
for, as already explained, a state could not be made party to a suit
before the courts, either state or federal, without her consent; and
it is a well settled principle of American law that "a suit nominally
against an officer but really against a state to enforce performance
of its obligation in its political capacity, will not lie." A state,
therefore, could not be directly arraigned before the courts or any
kind of tribunal for failure to enforce its political obligations; nor
could it be indirectly so arraigned through its officers since such
an arraignment would undoubtedly have been held to be but "nominally
against the officers and really against the state;" hence void. [17]
The only arraignment of the state that could be made was evidently
at the bar of public opinion and sentiment, and this sentiment,
unfortunately viciated by misrepresentations, was against the Saints.
All things considered, then, there was little wisdom behind the
recommendation of the Senate Judiciary Committee for the Saints to
prosecute their case before the Federal courts having jurisdiction
in Missouri; and {XXX} the suggestion that they apply to the justice
and magnanimity of the state of the Missouri, borders upon mockery.
However, Missouri did not escape the chastisement due to her many
acts of predatory injustice upon the Saints; there was measured out
to her more than four fold of that sorrow and affliction which she
had perpetrated upon the Saints. She sowed to the wind in her conduct
towards the Mormon people, she reaped the whirl-wind in the terrible
experiences of more then ten years of border warfare, banditti rule,
and her enormous sacrifice of blood and treasure in the Civil War; all
of which is abundantly set forth in the Introduction to Volume III of
this work.

_The Mission of the Twelve to England_.

The mission of the Twelve to England marks an epoch in the missionary
experience of the Church. They undertook this mission in fulfillment
of a commandment received of the Lord on the 8th of July, 1838, at Far
West, Missouri, which revelation was given in answer to the question
of the Prophet: "Show us thy will, O Lord, concerning the Twelve." In
answer to that question the Lord directed that the several vacancies
then existing in the quorum should be filled by the appointment of John
Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff, and Willard Richards. "And next
spring," said the revelation, "let them [the Twelve] depart to go over
the great waters and there promulgate my gospel, the fullness thereof,
and bear record of my name. Let them take leave of my Saints in the
City Far West on the 26th day of April next, on the building spot of my
house saith the Lord." [18]

Notwithstanding the fact that the Church had been expelled from the
state of Missouri before the 26th day of April, 1839, a number of the
Twelve accompanied by several of those who had been appointed to fill
vacancies in the quorum, returned to Far West, held a meeting on the
site of the Lord's house in the public square of that place, on the
date appointed, sung some hymns, ordained those present who had been
appointed to fill vacancies in the quorum, laid a corner stone of the
Lord's house, took leave of a few of the brethren who were there, and
thence started for foreign lands, stopping for a time _en route_ at
Nauvoo. Late in the summer of 1839 the Twelve began their departure,
usually in pairs, for foreign lands. The work had already been
introduced into England by the labors of Elder Heber C. Kimball and
associates, Elder Orson Hyde of the quorum of the Twelve; also Elders
Willard Richards, Isaac Russell, John Goodson, John Snyder; and Joseph
Fielding, a priest. The mission of the Twelve to England as a quorum,
however, established the work in the British Isles on a broader and
more {XXXI} permanent basis, and thence forward the body religious was
strengthened from this mission; and as much from the character as from
the numbers of the British Saints.

_The Mission of Orson Hyde to Palestine_.

The mission appointed to Elders Orson Hyde and John E. Page, of the
quorum of the Twelve, to Jerusalem, was second in importance only to
that appointed to the rest of the Twelve to Great Britain. John E.
Page utterly failed to fulfill his appointment, notwithstanding the
frequent urging and reproofs of the Prophet. He never left the shores
of America, and finally returned to Nauvoo to be severely censured for
his lack of faith and energy. Orson Hyde, on the contrary, in the midst
of many hardships, persevered in his journey to the Holy Land, until
he succeeded in accomplishing that which had been appointed unto him.
Elder Hyde it appears, was a descendant of the tribe of Judah; [19]
and sometime after the Prophet had become acquainted with him, most
probably in the year 1832, in the course of pronouncing a blessing upon
him, said: "In due time thou shalt go to Jerusalem, the land of thy
fathers, and be a watchman unto the house of Israel; and by thy hand
shall the Most High do a great work, which shall prepare the way and
greatly facilitate the gathering together of that people." [20] It was
in fulfillment of this prediction upon his head that he had been called
upon this mission to Jerusalem, to dedicate the land of Palestine by
apostolic authority, preparatory to the return of the Jews and other
of the tribes of Israel to that land of promise. This mission he fully
accomplished. An account of his journey and of his beautiful and
powerful prayer of dedication will be found in his letters published in
this volume. [21]

The question will be asked, Has anything resulted from this mission
to dedicate the land of Palestine to the return of the Jews and other
tribes of Israel? The only answer is an appeal to facts, to events
that have taken place since that prayer of consecration was offered up
by this Apostle of the new dispensation of the Gospel, on the 24th of
October, 1841.

At the time of Elder Hyde's visit and the ceremonies of dedication he
performed on the Mount of Olives, there were comparatively but few
Jews at Jerusalem. As late as 1876 the British Consul Reports show
that there were but from fifteen to twenty thousand Jews in Judea.
But twenty years later the same authority declared the number of Jews
at sixty to seventy thousand; and, what was of more importance than
{XXXII} the numbers announced, these reports represented that the new
Jewish population was turning its attention to the cultivation of the
soil, which but requires the blessings of God upon it to restore it to
its ancient fruitfulness, and which will make it possible for it to
sustain once more a numerous population. The St. Louis _Globe-Democrat_
commenting on these Consular Reports of 1896, said:

"Only two decades ago there were not more than fifteen or twenty
thousand Jews in Jerusalem. At that time no houses were to be found
outside the walls of the city. Since then many changes have taken place
and the Hebrew population--mainly on account of the increase of the
Jewish immigration from Russia--now stands at between sixty and seventy
thousand. Whole streets of houses have been built outside the walls
on the site of the ancient suburban districts, which for hundreds of
years have remained deserted. It is not, however, only in Jerusalem
itself that the Jews abound, but throughout Palestine they are buying
farms and establishing themselves in a surprisingly rapid manner. In
Jerusalem they form at present a larger community than either the
Christian or the Mohammedan."

Also in 1896 that racial movement among the Jews known as "Zionism"
took definite form. This movement was really the federation of all
the Jewish societies that have cherished the hope of seeing Israel
restored to his promised possessions in Palestine. That year the first
international conference of Zionists was held in Basel, Switzerland,
and since then under the leadership of the late Dr. Herzel of Austria,
and since his death under the leadership of Israel Zangwill, and by
reason of its annual conferences constantly increasing in interest
and attendance, "Zionism" has taken on all the aspects of one of the
world's great movements. It is not so much a religious movement as a
racial one; for prominent Jews of all shades of both political and
religious opinions have participated in it.

After saying through so many centuries at the feast of the Passover,
"May we celebrate the next Passover in Jerusalem," the thought seems
to have occurred to some Jewish minds that if that hope is ever to
be realized some practical steps must be taken looking to the actual
achievement of the possibility--hence the "Zionite Movement." The
keynotes of that movement are heard in the following utterances of some
of the Jewish leaders in explanation of it: "We want to resume the
broken thread of our national existence; we want to show to the world
the moral strength, the intellectual power of the Jewish people. We
want a place where the race can be centralized."--(Leon Zoltokoff). "It
is for these Jews (of Russia, Roumania and Galicia) that the name of
their country (Palestine) spells 'Hope.' I should not be a man if I did
not realize that for these persecuted Jews, Jerusalem spells reason,
{XXXIII} justice, manhood and liberty."--(Rabbi Emil G. Hirsch).
"Jewish nationalism on a modern basis in Palestine, the old home of
the people."--(Max Nordau). "Palestine needs a people, Israel needs
a country. Give the country without a people to the people without a
country."--(Israel Zangwill). In a word it is the purpose of "Zionism"
to redeem Palestine, and give it back to Jewish control, create, in
fact, a Jewish state in the land promised to their fathers.

The age has come when the promises of the Lord to Israel must be
fulfilled; and hence an apostle of the new dispensation of the
Gospel is sent by divine authority to dedicate the land of Palestine
preparatory to the return of Israel to his promised inheritance.
After which follows this strange and world-wide movement among the
Jews looking to the re-establishment of "Jewish nationalism on a
modern basis in Palestine." What other relationship can exist between
the mission of the Apostle Orson Hyde and this world-wide movement
among the Jews for the re-establishment of Israel in Palestine, but
the relationship of cause to effect--under, of course, the larger
fact that the set time for the restoration of Israel has come? The
apostle's mission to Jerusalem for the purpose of dedicating that land,
preparatory to the return of Israel, was without doubt part of the
general program for the restoration of Israel to their lands and to the
favor and blessing of God.

_The Doctrinal Development of the Church_.

The doctrinal development in this period of the dispensation of the
fullness of times, namely, between July, 1839, and the month of May,
1842, about three years, was chiefly in relation to salvation for
the dead, and the sacred ritual of the Temple. The foundation for
this doctrinal development in relation to salvation for the dead, was
laid in the very inception of the work. On the occasion of the first
visit of the angel Moroni to the Prophet, on the night of the 21st of
September, 1823, among other ancient prophecies quoted by him, and
which he declared was soon to be fulfilled, was the prophecy in the
fourth chapter of Malachi in relation to the future coming of Elijah
the prophet, "before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the
Lord." As quoted by the angel there was a slight variation in the
language from King James' version, as follows: "Behold, I will reveal
unto you the Priesthood by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the
coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord. And he shall plant in
the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the
hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers; if it were not so,
the whole world would be wasted at his coming." [22]

Here the promise is made, that in consequence of the restoration of
a certain Priesthood, or special keys of authority held by Elijah,
the promises made to the fathers shall be planted in the hearts of
the children, "and the hearts of the children shall turn to their
fathers." Why? For a complete answer to that question the Church
waited some years. Again, and still early in the history of the
work, namely, March, 1830, the Lord in a revelation to Martin Harris
through the Prophet Joseph, added another line or two of knowledge
to this doctrine; knowledge which pushed out of the horizon of men's
conceptions the terrible and unjust doctrine respecting the eternal
punishment which God is supposed to inflict upon those who fail to obey
the Gospel in this life, and also those who died in ignorance of it.
In explanation of the terms, "eternal punishment," and "everlasting
punishment," sometimes found in Holy Writ, the Lord said to the
Prophet: "Behold, I am endless, and the punishment which is given from
my hand is endless, for endless is my name. Wherefore--

"Eternal punishment is God's punishment.

"Endless punishment is God's punishment."

That is to say, the punishment takes the name of Him in whose name
it is inflicted; as if it were written, "Eternal's punishment,"
"Endless's punishment." And also, it must be understood, that the
punishment itself is endless. That is, penalties always attend upon
law, and follow its violation. That is an eternal principle. Law is
inconceivable without accompanying penalties. But it does not follow
that those who fall into the transgression of law, and therefore under
sentence of Eternal's justice, will have to endure affliction of the
penalty eternally. Justice can be satisfied. Mercy must be accorded her
claims, and the culprit having been brought to repentance and taught
obedience to law through the things which he has suffered, must go
free. But only to suffer again the penalties of the law, if he again
violates it; for laws and their penalties are eternal. Hence eternal
punishment, hence endless punishment administered to the violator of
the law, until he learns to live in harmony with law. For, on the one
hand, as "that which is governed by law is also preserved by law, and
perfected and sanctified by the same;" [23] so "that which breaketh
a law and abideth not by the law, but seeketh to become a law unto
itself, and willeth to abide in sin and altogether abideth in sin,
cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy, justice, nor judgment.
Therefore they must remain filthy still." [24] Thus obedience to law
becomes a savor of life unto life; while disobedience to law equally
becomes a savor of death unto death.

In February, 1832, still further light was shed upon the subject of
{XXXV} the different states or degrees of glory in which men will live
in the future, by the revelation known as "The Vision." This revelation
is one of the sublimest ever given to man. It utterly discredits and
displaces the dogmas about the future of man held by Christendom, or
at least by Protestant Christendom. The orthodox, Protestant view
of man's future is that there are two states in one or the other of
which man will spend eternity--in heaven or in hell. If one shall gain
heaven, even by ever so small a margin, he will enter immediately upon
a complete possession of all its unspeakable joys, equally with the
angels and the holiest of Saints. Not only in the "Shorter Catechisms,"
but in nearly all orthodox creeds the accepted doctrine was: "The souls
of believers are at their death made perfect in holiness." On the
other hand, if one shall miss heaven, even by ever so small a margin,
he is doomed to everlasting torment equally with the wickedest of men
and vilest of devils, and there is no deliverance for him through
all the countless ages of eternity! It will be noted that I have
excepted out of participating in the above view of man's future, the
Catholic church, by ascribing these views only to orthodox Protestant
Christendom. This is because the Catholic church doctrine slightly
differs from the doctrine of the Protestants on this subject. That is
Catholics do not believe that all Christians at death go immediately
into heaven, but on the contrary "believe that a Christian who dies
after the guilt and everlasting punishment of mortal sins have been
forgiven him, but who, either from want of opportunity, or through
his negligence has not discharged the debt of temporal punishment due
to his sin, will have to discharge that debt to the justice of God
in purgatory." "Purgatory is a state of suffering after this life,
in which those souls are for a time detained, which depart this life
after their deadly sins have been remitted as to the stain and guilt,
and as to the everlasting pain that was due to them, but which souls
have on account of those sins still some temporal punishment to pay; as
also those souls which leave this world guilty only of venial (that is
pardonable) sins. In purgatory these souls are purified and rendered
fit to enter into heaven, where nothing defiled enters." [25] As all
works of the Catholic church accessible to me have nothing on the
different degrees of glory in which men shall subsist in eternity, I
conclude that Catholic teaching is that they who finally attain unto
heaven are all equal in glory. So that in the last analysis of the
matter, Catholic doctrine falls as far below the great truth that God
has revealed upon the subject of the future estate of man, as the
doctrine of orthodox Protestant Christendom.

Here is not the place for an extended exposition of the doctrine in
{XXXVI} relation to the future state of man as revealed to Joseph Smith
in the revelation called "The Vision." [26] It must suffice here to say
that its central principle is resident in the justice and the mercy
of God, that requires that every man shall be judged according to his
works, considered in the light of his intelligence, his consciousness
of right and wrong, and the moral law under which he lived. If he lived
in the earth when the Gospel of Jesus Christ was not in the world, or
if he lived at places or in circumstances where he did not learn of
its existence, much less come to a knowledge of its truths, then the
plain dictates of justice demand that some means must exist by which
its sanctifying powers may be applied to him in the future; so also as
to those who have even once rejected the truth (as in the case of the
antediluvians who rejected the teaching of righteous Noah, and were
disobedient, [27] when once the long suffering of God waited in vain
in those days for their repentance); having paid the just penalty of
their disobedience, then justice would demand that some means must
exist by which the saving principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ may
be applied to them; for only by the acceptance of the principles of the
Gospel, and by the application of its laws and ordinances as the means
by which the grace of God is applied to man, can the sons of men hope
for salvation. Then as men differ in degree of intelligence; in the
intensity of their faith; in the hartiness of their obedience; in the
steadiness of their fidelity; and in as much as there is the stern fact
of human freedom and responsibility, and the possibility of a short
or long resistance to the will of God, even up to eternal resistance
to that will, there is an infinitude of states of glory, of so called
rewards and punishments, in which man will live in the future. There
is one glory of which the sun in heaven is spoken of as being typical;
another of which the inferior light of the moon is typical; and another
of which the varying light of the stars is typical. And even as one
star differs from another star in glory, in light, so differ those
states of existence in which men will live in the future, but each
assigned to a place, to an environment, that corresponds to the status
of his development; which is only the modern way of saying he shall
be judged according to his works. These, in brief, are the underlying
principles of this remarkable revelation; a revelation which in every
way is worthy the encomium that the Prophet Joseph himself bestowed
upon it at the time of its inception: "Nothing could be more pleasing
to the Saints upon the order of the Kingdom of the Lord, than the light
which burst upon the world through the foregoing Vision. Every law,
every commandment, every promise, every truth, and every point touching
the destiny of man, from Genesis to Revelation, where the purity of
the {XXXVII} Scriptures remains unsullied by the folly of men, go to
show the perfection of the theory [of different degrees of glory in the
future life] and witnesses the fact that _that document is a transcript
from the records of the eternal world_."

In June, 1836, while attending to washings and anointings in the
Kirtland Temple, previous to its dedication, the Prophet received still
further knowledge as to the future state of man. This also was by means
of a vision. He says: "The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld
the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, whether in the
body or out, I cannot tell. I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate
through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, which was like
unto circling flames of fire; also the blazing throne of God, whereon
was seated the Father and the Son. I saw the beautiful streets of that
kingdom, which had the appearance of being paved with gold. I saw
Fathers Adam and Abraham, and my father and mother, my brother, Alvin,
that has long since slept, and marveled how it was that he had obtained
an inheritance in that kingdom, seeing that he had departed this life
before the Lord had set His hand to gather Israel the second time, and
had not been baptized for the remission of sins. Thus came the voice of
the Lord unto me saying--

"_All who have died without a knowledge of this Gospel, who would have
received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the
celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without
a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts,
shall be heirs of that kingdom, for I, the Lord, will judge all men
according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts_."

"And I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the
years of accountability, are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven."

The next step in the development of this doctrine of salvation for the
dead was the coming of Elijah to "turn the heart of the fathers to the
children, and the heart of the children to the fathers," according to
Malachi; to restore the priesthood and "plant in the hearts of the
children the promises made to the fathers," by which "the hearts of
the children shall be turned to the fathers," according to Moroni. And
Elijah committed the keys of this dispensation of turning the hearts
of the fathers and children towards each other to Joseph Smith and to
Oliver Cowdery. This took place in the Kirtland Temple on the 3rd of
April, 1836. [28]

It was not, however, until the Nauvoo period that the doctrine of
salvation for the dead was fully developed and active steps taken
looking to the actual performance of ordinances in their behalf. In
the revelation that was given on the 19th of January, 1841, the Saints
{XXXVIII} were commanded to build a house unto the Lord, a Holy Temple
unto the Most High. "For," said this revelation, "there is not a place
found on earth that He may come to and restore again that which was
lost unto you, or which He hath taken away, even the fullness of the
Priesthood; for a baptismal font there is not upon the earth, that
they, my Saints, may be baptized for those who are dead; for this
ordinance belongeth to my house, and cannot be acceptable to me, only
in the days of your poverty, wherein ye are not able to build a house
unto me. But I command you, all ye my Saints, to build a house unto me;
and I grant unto you a sufficient time to build a house unto me, and
during this time your baptisms shall be acceptable unto me." That is,
the baptisms for the dead should be acceptable unto the Lord in other
places than the temple, until the temple should be prepared for that
ordinance, if the Saints would be diligent and build it according to
the Lord's appointment. Moreover, the information is imparted in the
revelation that, it is "in Zion, and in her stakes, and in Jerusalem,
those places which I [the Lord] have appointed for refuge, shall be the
places for your baptisms for your dead."

After this revelation was given to the Church baptism for the dead
was a subject frequently expounded in Nauvoo, both by the Prophet and
other leading elders. It was a theme upon which the Twelve Apostles
dwelt in their Epistles to the Church both in America and in Great
Britain. Baptisms for the dead were performed for some time in the
Mississippi river, and later, in the latter part of November, 1841, in
the baptismal font erected in the basement of the Temple, and dedicated
for that sacred purpose. For a time some irregularities obtained in
relation to this ordinance owing to the fact that the perfect knowledge
of the order of it had not then been obtained, but was developed later
in this Nauvoo period of the History of the Church, as will appear in
Volume V of this work.

It was a mighty stride forward in the doctrinal development of the
Church, this idea of the possibility of salvation for the dead through
the administration of the ordinances of the Gospel for and in their
behalf by their kindred on earth; and greatly enlarged the views of
the Saints in relation to the importance and wide spread effects of
their work. The ends of the earth indeed converged in the labors of
the Saints henceforth, for their activities in the administrations of
the holy ordinances of the Gospel would affect all past generations as
well as affect all generations to come. It was a bringing into view the
full half of the work which up to this time had lain hidden behind the
horizon of men's conceptions of that "great and marvelous work" which
God from the beginning declared was about to be brought forth among the
children of men. [29]

{XXXIX} _Other Doctrines of the Prophet's Teaching_.

Other doctrines taught by the Prophet within the period covered by this
volume, relate to the Priesthood; to the Status of Translated Persons;
to Man's Personal Responsibility for his own conduct, to Election and
Reprobation. A word in relation to each of these doctrines must suffice
here since they do not reach their full development in the teachings
of the Prophet until the last two years of his eventful life, and must
therefore receive fuller treatment in the Introduction of Volume V.

Relative to the Priesthood, the most important items advanced by the
Prophet in this volume, are, first, the unity of all Priesthood, and
second, the place and power assigned to Adam in the order of the
dispensations of the Gospel granted to our earth. Treating on the
unity of the Priesthood, the Prophet said: "There are two Priesthoods
spoken of in the Scriptures, viz., the Melchisedek and the Aaronic or
Levitical. Although there are two Priesthoods, yet the Melchisedek
Priesthood comprehends the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood, and is
the grand head, and holds the highest authority which pertains to
the Priesthood, and the keys of the kingdom of God in all ages of
the world to the latest posterity on the earth, and is the channel
through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation, and
every important matter is revealed from heaven. Its institution was
prior to 'the foundation of this earth, or the morning stars sang
together, or the Sons of God shouted for joy,' and is the highest and
holiest Priesthood, and is after the order of the Son of God, and all
other Priesthoods are only parts, ramifications, powers and blessings
belonging to the same, and are held, controlled, and directed by it. It
is the channel through which the Almighty commenced revealing His glory
at the beginning of the creation of this earth, and through which He
has continued to reveal Himself to the children of men to the present
time, and through which He will make known His purposes to the end of
time."

Respecting the place of Adam in the Priesthood and his relationship to
the dispensations of that Priesthood to our earth, the Prophet said:
"Commencing with Adam, who was the first man, who is spoken of in
Daniel as being the 'Ancient of Days,' or in other words, the first
and oldest of all, the great, grand progenitor of whom it is said
in another place he is Michael, because he was the first and father
of all, not only by progeny, but the first to hold the spiritual
blessings, to whom was made known the plan of ordinances for the
salvation of his posterity unto the end, and to whom Christ was first
revealed, and through whom Christ has been revealed from heaven, and
will continue to be revealed from henceforth. Adam holds the keys of
the dispensation of the fullness of times; i. e., the dispensation
of all the times have been and will {XL} be revealed through him
from the beginning to Christ, and from Christ to the end of all the
dispensations that are to be revealed. 'Having made known unto us the
mystery of His will, according to His good pleasure which He hath
purposed in Himself: that in the dispensation of the fullness of times
He might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are
in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him (Ephesians, 1st chap.,
9th and 10th verses). Now the purpose in Himself in the winding up
scene of the last dispensation is that all things pertaining to that
dispensation should be conducted precisely in accordance with the
preceding dispensations. And again. God purposed in Himself that there
should not be an eternal fullness until every dispensation should be
fulfilled and gathered together in one, and that all things whatsoever,
that should be gathered together in one in those dispensations unto the
same fullness and eternal glory, should be in Christ Jesus; therefore
He set the ordinances to be the same forever and ever, and set Adam to
watch over them, to reveal them from heaven to man, or to send angels
to reveal them. * * * * These angels are under the direction of Michael
or Adam, who acts under the direction of the Lord. * * * * There are
many things which belong to the powers of the Priesthood and the keys
thereof, that have been kept hid from before the foundation of the
world; they are hid from the wise and prudent to be revealed in the
last times."

That it was the design of the Lord in building the Temple at Nauvoo,
that there should be other ordinances revealed besides "baptism for
the dead," is clearly manifested in the revelation itself, for it
says: "And again, verily I say unto you, how shall your washings be
acceptable unto me, except ye perform them in a house which you have
built to my name. * * * * Therefore, verily I say unto you, that
your anointings, and your washings, and your baptisms for the dead,
and your solemn assemblies, and your memorials for your sacrifices,
by the sons of Levi and for your oracles in your most holy places
wherein you receive conversations, and your statutes and judgments,
for the beginning of the revelations and foundation of Zion, and for
the glory, honor, and endowment of all her municipals, are ordained by
the ordinance of my holy house which my people are always commanded to
build unto my holy name. And verily I say unto you, let this house be
built unto my name, that I may reveal mine ordinances therein, unto my
people; for I deign to reveal unto my Church things which have been
kept hid from before the foundation of the word, things that pertain to
the dispensation of the fullness of times."

The ordinances here mentioned in addition to baptism for the dead are
chiefly connected with the Priesthood of the Church, and were fully
developed in the teachings of the Prophet before the close of his
eventful career.

{XLI} As to the status of translated personages, he said: "Many have
supposed that the doctrine of translation was a doctrine whereby men
were taken immediately into the presence of God, and into an eternal
fulness, but this is a mistaken idea. Their place of habitation is that
of the terrestrial order, and a place prepared for such characters
He held in reserve to be ministering angels unto many planets, and
who as yet have not entered into as great a fullness as those who are
resurrected from the dead."

Of man being personally responsible for his own conduct, he is reported
by the Editor of the _Times and Seasons_ as saying: "He [the Prophet]
then observed that Satan was generally blamed for the evils which we
did, but if he was the cause of all our wickedness, men could not be
condemned. The devil could not compel mankind to do evil; all was
voluntary. Those who resisted the Spirit of God, would be liable to
be led into temptation, and then the association of heaven would be
withdrawn from those who refused to be made partakers of such great
glory. God _would not_ exert any compulsory means, and the devil _could
not_; and such ideas as were entertained [on these subjects] by many
were absurd." What beautiful harmony between the Prophet's doctrine
here and that of the Apostle James: "Let no man say when he is tempted,
I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither
tempteth he any man: But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of
his own lusts, and enticed. Then when lust hath conceived, it bringing
forth sin: and sin when it is finished, bringeth forth death." [30]

Of election, a term used generally in connection with reprobation, when
commenting on the 9th Chapter of Romans,--wherein Paul is supposed to
teach the doctrine of election,--the Prophet is represented as saying:
"He then spoke on the subject of election, and read the 9th chapter of
Romans, from which it was evident that the election there spoken of
was pertaining to the flesh, and had reference to the seed of Abraham,
according to the promise God made to Abraham, saying, 'In thee, and in
thy seed, all the families of the earth shall be blessed.' * * * The
whole of the chapter had reference to the Priesthood and the house of
Israel: and unconditional election of individuals to eternal life was
not taught by the Apostles. God did elect or predestinate, that all
those who would be saved, should be saved in Christ Jesus, and through
obedience to the Gospel, but He passes over no man's sins, but visits
them with correction, and if His children will not repent of their sins
He will discard them."

These several doctrines mark rapid development in the Prophet's work
as an instructor in sacred things, and clearly indicate his increasing
capacity and power as Prophet, Seer and Teacher.

Footnotes

1. The population in 1830 was but 155,061; and in 1840, 472,254.

2. The population of Illinois in 1900 was 4,821,550--nearly five
millions: the estimated population for 1908 is 5,590,000.

3. Commenting once in a half humorous way upon his "exalted" military
rank, the Prophet said to Josiah Quincy, who remarks that the Prophet
at the time of his visit to Nauvoo (May, 1843), was at the head of
3,000 men equipped by the state of Illinois, represents him as having
said:

"I decided that the commander of my troops ought to be a
lieutenant-general, and I was, of course, chosen to that position.
I sent my certificate of election to Governor Ford, and received in
return a commission of lieutenant-general of the Nauvoo Legion of the
militia of the State of Illinois. Now, on examining the constitution
of the United States, I find that an officer must be tried by a
court martial composed of his equals in rank; and as I am the only
lieutenant-general in the country, I think they will find it pretty
hard to try me." _Figures of the Past_, p. 383.

4. This volume, p. 249.

5. Section 11, this volume, p. 241. The Prophet quoted from memory, and
is not exact; the exact language is--"As they deem necessary for the
peace, benefit, good order, regulation, convenience and cleanliness of
said city."

6. The official census of 1905 give the population of New York at
4,014,304. The estimated population on January 1, 1908, is 4,285,435.

7. Official returns for 1900 give Philadelphia a population of
1,293,697. The estimated population for Jan. 1, 1908, is 1,491,161.

8. Official statistics for 1905 give Boston a population of 595,083.
The estimated population for Jan. 1, 1908, is 607,340.

9. Official returns for 1900 give Baltimore a population of 508,957.
The estimated population for Jan. 1, 1908, is 567,000.

10. The estimated population of Brooklyn as a borough of greater New
York is given on Jan. 1, 1908, as 1,448,095.

11. Official statistics for 1900 give Chicago a population of
1,698,575. The estimated population for Jan. 1, 1908 is 2,483,641.

12. Official statistics for 1900 give St. Louis a population of
575,238. The estimated population on Jan. 1, 1908, is 50,000.

13. Art. III Const. U.S., Sec. ii.

14. Am. Commonwealth (Bryce) Vol. I p. 231.

15. Railroad Co. v. Tennessee, U.S. Reports 101, 337.

16. Clark v. Barnard U.S. 108, 436, and Green v. State 73 Cal. 29 et
seq.

17. See Cooler's Constitutional Limitations, chapter ii, also Louisiana
v. Jumel 107 U.S. Reports, p. 711, 2 sup. et. rep. 128.

18. History of the Church, Vol. III, p. 46.

19. See this Volume, p. 375.

20. _Ibid_.

21. The prayer of Dedication will be found at pp. 456-459.

22. History of the Church, Vol. I, p. 12.

23. Doctrine and Covenants, Sec. lxxxviii:34.

24. _Ibid_, verse 35.

25. The quotations in the above are from "Catholic Belief," by Bruno,
D. D. of the Catholic church.

26. Doctrine and Covenants, Sec. lxxvi, and History of the Church Vol.
I, 245 _et seq_.

27. 1 Peter iii, 18-22.

28. See History of the Church, Vol. II, p. 435-436. Also Doc. and Cov.
Sec. cx.

29. See Doc. And Cov. the opening paragraph of Sections iv, vi, xi,
xii, xiv, all given in the year 1829.

30. James 1, 13-15

{1}



CHAPTER I.

The Departure of the Twelve for England--Manifestation of God's Power
in Healing the Sick at Commerce.

[Sidenote: The Prophet's Literary Methods.]

_Friday, July 5, 1839._--I was dictating history, I say dictating, for
I seldom use the pen myself. I always dictate all my communications,
but employ a scribe to write them.

_Saturday, 6._--I was at home reviewing the Church records.

[Sidenote: Farewell to the Twelve.]

_Sunday, 7._--I was at the meeting held in the open air, at which a
large assemblage was expected to listen to the farewell address of the
Twelve, who were then about to take their departure on a most important
mission, namely to the nations of the earth and the islands of the sea.

Elder John E. Page being the first of the Twelve present, opened the
meeting by addressing a few words of an introductory nature; after
singing and prayer, Elder Page {2} delivered a very interesting
discourse on the subject of the Book of Mormon, recapitulating,
in short terms, the principles of a former discourse on the same
subject, and afterwards proceeded to read portions from the Bible and
Book of Mormon concerning the best criterions whereby to judge of
the authenticity of the latter; and then went on to show in a very
satisfactory manner, that no impostor would ever attempt to make such
promises as are contained on pages five hundred forty-one, [1] and five
hundred and thirty-four. [2] He then bore testimony.

After noon the meeting was again opened by prayer. Elder John Taylor
spoke on the subject of this dispensation; the other angel which John
saw, having the everlasting Gospel to preach, he then bore testimony of
the truth of the Book of Mormon.

Elder Woodruff's address went chiefly to exhortation to the Saints;
after which he also bore his testimony.

Elder Orson Hyde next came forward, and having alluded to his own late
fall, [3] exhorted all to perseverance in the things of God, expressed
himself one with his brethren, and bore testimony to his knowledge of
the truth, and the misery of falling from it.

Elder Brigham Young made some very appropriate remarks, and also bore
testimony to the truth of these things, and gave an invitation to come
forward and be baptized, when three manifested their determination to
renounce the world and take upon themselves the name of Jesus Christ.
One brother was then confirmed; after which President Sidney Rigdon
addressed the meeting in a very feeling manner. He showed that it must
be no small matter which could induce men to leave their families
and their homes to travel over all the earth amidst persecutions and
trials, such as always followed the preaching of this Gospel. He then
addressed himself to {3} the Twelve and gave them some counsel and
consolation as far as lay in his power; after which I requested their
prayers, and promised to pray for them.

The meeting was large and respectable; a great number were present
who did not belong to the Church. The most perfect order prevailed
throughout. The meeting was dismissed about half-past five, when we
repaired to the water, and the three candidates were baptized and
confirmed.

[Sidenote: The L. D. S. Hymn Book.]

_Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, 8th, 9th and 10th of July_.--I was with
the Twelve selecting hymns, for the purpose of compiling a hymn book.

About this time much sickness began to manifest itself among the
brethren, as well as among the inhabitants of the place, so that this
week and the following were generally spent in visiting the sick and
administering to them; some had faith enough and were healed; others
had not.

[Sidenote: Administration to the sick.]

_Sunday, 21_.--There was no meeting on account of much rain and much
sickness; however many of the sick were this day raised up by the power
of God, through the instrumentality of the Elders of Israel ministering
unto them in the name of Jesus Christ.

_Monday and Tuesday, 22nd and 23rd_.--The sick were administered
unto with great success, [4] but many remain sick, and new cases are
occurring daily.

{4} _Discourses by the Brothers Pratt_.

_Sunday 28_.--Meeting was held as usual. Elder Parley P. Pratt preached
on the gathering of Israel. In the afternoon Orson Pratt addressed the
Church on the necessity of keeping the commandments of God. I spoke,
and admonished the members of the Church individually to set their
houses in order, to make clean the inside of the platter, and to {5}
meet on the next Sabbath to partake of the Sacrament, in order that by
our obedience to the ordinances, we might be enabled to prevail with
God against the destroyer, and that the sick might be healed.

All this week chiefly spent among the sick, who in general are gaining
strength, and recovering health.

[Sidenote: Prayer Meeting for the Sick.]

_Sunday, August 4._--The Church came together for prayer meeting and
Sacrament. I exhorted the Church at length, concerning the necessity of
being righteous, and clean at heart before the Lord. Many others also
spoke; especially some of the Twelve, who were present, professed their
willingness to proceed on their mission to Europe, without either purse
or scrip. The Sacrament was administered; a spirit of humility and
harmony prevailed, and the Church passed a resolution that the Twelve
proceed on their mission as soon as possible, and that the Saints
provide for their families during their absence.

    _Letter to Isaac Russell, reproving him for issuing pretended
    revelations to the Saints_.

    Commerce, Hancock County, Illinois, 5th August, 1839.

    Dear Sir:--I have been requested to write you on behalf of the
    Twelve, who are just on the eve of their departure for England, and
    {6} inform you, that "this thing" which you have thought proper to
    write as a revelation "to the Church in Alston and the branches
    round about," to which you yourself administered, has "already come
    to the knowledge of the Churches" both here and elsewhere, and lest
    you should have any doubt concerning the fact, we send you a copy
    of your revelation to that Church.

    I am sir, with all respect,

    Yours truly,

    James Mulholland.

    P. S.--Isaiah chap. L, 10th and 11th verses. [5] In my own behalf I
    wish to state that I sincerely wish that it may soon come to pass
    that you, sir, and all our friends at Far West may perceive that
    you are walking in the light of a fire, and sparks that you have
    yourselves kindled; and that you may turn around and fear the Lord,
    obey the voice of His servant, and thereby escape the sentence, "Ye
    shall lie down in sorrow."

    J. M.

    _To Mr. Isaac Russell, Far West, Missouri_.

_Conference in New Jersey_.

_Friday, 9_.--A Conference was held at Brother Caleb Bennett's Monmouth
County, New Jersey, Elder John P. Greene presiding. The New York and
Brooklyn branches were represented by the President as being in good
fellowship. There were represented at this conference the following
branches, by Elder Ball, Shrewsbury, New Jersey, numbering twenty
members; Montage, three; Minissink, New Hampshire, two; Albany, eight;
Holliston, Massachusetts, sixteen; Elder Dunham represented Hamilton,
Madison County, forty-six; Samuel James, Leechburg, Pennsylvania, forty.

_Sunday, 11_.--I attended meeting in the forenoon and heard a sermon
by Parley P. Pratt. In the afternoon there was one baptized, and four
were confirmed, namely, {7} Brother Hibbard, his wife, little son, and
daughter. The Sacrament was administered.

This week I spent chiefly in visiting the sick; sickness much decreased.

_Sunday, 18_.--Rode out in the forenoon. Orson Pratt preached upon the
order and plan of creation. Three were baptized.

Afternoon: Three confirmed and one ordained an Elder.

This week I spent chiefly among the sick. The Church made a purchase
of eighty acres from William White for four thousand dollars, lying
directly north of the Hugh White purchase.

_Sunday, 25_.--I attended meeting. Sickness decreasing.

_Thursday, 29_.--Elders Parley P. Pratt and family, Orson Pratt
and Hiram Clark, started on their mission to England, in their own
two-horse carriage--their route lying through Illinois, Indiana, and to
Detroit, the capital of Michigan, situated near the head of Lake Erie,
about five hundred and eighty miles distant.

[Sidenote: Progress of the Work in England.]

_Saturday, 31_.--The work is spreading in England. Elder Richards
went to the Staffordshire potteries this day, and Presidents Joseph
Fielding and William Clayton were visiting and setting in order many of
the branches, and ordaining many to the ministry who are diligent in
preaching as they have opportunity on the Sabbath in the surrounding
villages.

_Sunday, September 1_.--I attended meeting, and spoke concerning some
errors in Parley P. Pratt's writings. This week sickness much decreased.

_Monday, 9_, and the greater part of the week.--I spent in visiting the
sick, and attending to the settlement of our new town. [6]

{8}

    _The Prophet's Letter to Isaac Galland.--Nauvoo Affairs_.

    Commerce, Illinois, 11th September, 1839.

    Dear Brother Galland:--We have had the great pleasure of receiving
    your favor of the 24th July; and learning thereby that you and
    your family had arrived at Chillicothe in safety and in health. We
    perceive that you have had a rather narrow escape from a serious
    accident; and doubtless the hand of the Lord is to be acknowledged
    in the matter, although unperceived by mortal eye. Time and
    experience will teach us more and more how easily falsehood gains
    credence with mankind in general, rather than the truth; but
    especially in taking into consideration the plan of salvation. The
    plain simple order of the Gospel of Jesus Christ never has been
    discerned or acknowledged as the truth, except by a few--among whom
    were "not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many
    noble;" whilst the majority have contented themselves with their
    own private opinions, or have adopted those of others, according
    to their address, their philosophy, their formula, their policy,
    or their fineness may have attracted their attention, or pleased
    their taste. But, sir, of all the other criterions whereby we may
    judge of the vanity of these things, one will be always found true,
    namely, that we will always find such characters glorying in their
    own wisdom and their own works; whilst the humble Saint gives all
    the glory to God the Father, and to His Son Jesus Christ, whose
    yoke is easy and whose burden is light, and who told His disciples
    that unless they became like little children they could not enter
    the Kingdom of Heaven.

    As to the situation of the Church here, matters go with us as well
    as can reasonably be expected; we have had considerable sickness
    amongst us, but very few deaths; and as the greater part are now
    recovering we yet hope to have shelters provided before the winter
    shall set in.

    Since you left here, we have purchased out all Mr. Hotchkiss'
    interest hereabouts. His farm we have laid out as an addition to
    our town, Nauvoo, and the town of Commerce we also hope to build up.

    Some of the Twelve and others have already started for Europe, and
    the remainder of that mission we expect will go now in a few days.
    According to intelligence received since you left, the work of
    the Lord rolls on in a very pleasing manner, both in this and in
    the old country. In England many hundreds have of late been added
    to our numbers; but so, even so, it must be, for "Ephraim he hath
    mixed himself among the people." And the Savior He hath said, "My
    sheep hear my voice;" and also, "He that heareth you, heareth me;"
    and, "Behold I will bring them again from the north country, and
    gather them from the coasts of the earth." And as John heard the
    voice saying, "Come out of her, {9} my people," even so must all be
    fulfilled; that the people of the Lord may live when "Babylon the
    great is fallen, is fallen."

    There has quite a number of families gathered up here already; and
    we anticipate a continuance, especially as upon inquiry we have
    found that we have not had more than [the usual] ratio of sickness
    here, notwithstanding the trials we have had, and the hardships to
    which we have been exposed. Calculating as we do, upon the mercy
    and power of God in our behalf, we hope to persevere on in every
    good and useful work, even unto the end, that when we come to be
    tried in the balance we may not be found wanting.

    With all good wishes and prayers for the temporal and eternal
    salvation of yourself and your family, as well as of all the honest
    in heart over the face of the earth,

    We remain, sir, with sincerity,

    Your friend and brother,

    Joseph Smith, Jun.

    _Addressed to Isaac Galland, Esq., Kirtland, Geauga, County, Ohio_.

_Friday, 13_.--I left home for Brother William Smith's place.

[Sidenote: Brigham Young Starts on his Mission.]

_Saturday, 14_.--President Brigham Young started from his home at
Montrose, for England. His health was very poor; he was unable to go
thirty rods to the river without assistance. After he had crossed the
ferry he got Brother Israel Barlow to carry him on his horse behind him
to Heber C. Kimball's where he remained sick until the 18th. He left
his wife sick with a babe only ten days old, and all his children sick,
unable to wait upon each other. I returned home this evening.

_Sunday, 15_.--I was visiting the sick.

_Monday and Tuesday, 16 and 17_.--Was engaged in arranging the town
lots.

[Sidenote: Departure of Elders Young and Kimball from Nauvoo.]

_Wednesday, 18_.--Went to Burlington, Iowa Territory. Elders Young and
Kimball left Sister Kimball and all her children sick, except little
Heber; [7] went thirteen miles on their journey towards England, and
were left at Brother Osmon M. Duel's, who {10} lived in a small cabin
near the railway between Commerce and Warsaw. They were so feeble as to
be unable to carry their trunks into the house without the assistance
of Sister Duel, who received them kindly, prepared a bed for them to
lie on, and made them a cup of tea.

_Thursday, 19_.--I Returned this evening from Burlington.

Brother Duel carried Elders Young and Kimball in his wagon to Lima,
sixteen miles, where another brother received them and carried them to
Father Mikesell's near Quincy, about twenty miles; the fatigue of this
day was too much for their feeble health; they were prostrated, and
obliged to tarry a few days to recruit.

_Friday and Saturday, 20 and 21_.--At home attending to domestic and
Church business.

Elders George A. Smith, Reuben Hedlock, and Theodore Turley started
for England, and upset their wagon on the bank of the river, before
they got out of sight of Commerce. Elders Smith and Turley were so weak
they could not get up, and Brother Hedlock had to lift them in again.
Soon after, some gentlemen met them and asked who had been robbing the
burying ground--so miserable was their appearance through sickness.

_Sunday, 22_.--I presided at the meeting, and spoke concerning the
"other Comforter," as I had previously taught the Twelve. [8]

{11} This week I spent in transacting various business at home, except
when visiting the sick, who are in general recovering, though some of
them but slowly.

_Wednesday, 25_.--President Young went to Charles C. Rich's; 26th, to
Brother Wilber's; 27th, Brother Wilber carried Elders Young and Kimball
to Pittsfield.

[Sidenote: Items of Doctrine--the Prophet.]

_Sunday, 29_.--Held meeting at my own house. After others had spoken
I spoke and explained concerning the uselessness of preaching to the
world about great judgments, but rather to preach the simple Gospel.
Explained concerning the coming of the Son of Man; also that it is a
false idea that the Saints will escape all the judgments, whilst the
wicked suffer; for all flesh is subject to suffer, and "the righteous
shall hardly escape;" still many of the Saints will escape, for the
just shall live by faith; yet many of the righteous shall fall a
prey to disease, to pestilence, etc., by reason of the weakness of
the flesh, and yet be saved in the Kingdom of God. So that it is an
unhallowed principle to say that such and such have transgressed
because they have been preyed upon by disease or death, for all flesh
is subject to death; and the Savior has said, "Judge not, lest ye be
judged."

_Monday, 30_.--The fore part of this week I was at home preparing for
Conference. Elders Young and Kimball went to Brother Decker's and Mr.
Murray's, Sister Kimball's father.

_Tuesday, October 1_.--Elders Young and Kimball went to Brother Lorenzo
Young's.

_Thursday, 3_.--I was in counsel with the brethren.

_Friday, 4_.--Lorenzo Young carried Elders Young and Kimball to
Jacksonville.

_Saturday, 5_.--The friends and brethren conveyed the Elders of the
British Mission to Springfield, where they were kindly treated and
nursed, for they were yet very feeble.

I attended a general conference of the Church of Jesus {12} Christ of
Latter-day Saints at Commerce, Hancock County, Illinois, of which the
following are the minutes:

    _Minutes of Conference at Commerce, Illinois, October 6th, 7th and
    8th, 1839_.

    The meeting was opened by prayer by President Joseph Smith, Jun.,
    after which he was appointed President, and James Sloan Clerk of
    the conference, by a unanimous voice of the meeting. The President
    then spoke at some length upon the situation of the Church; the
    difficulties they have had to contend with; and the manner in which
    they had been led to this place; and wanted to know the views of
    the brethren, whether they wished to appoint this a stake of Zion
    or not; stating that he believed it to be a good place, and suited
    for the Saints. It was then unanimously agreed upon that it should
    be appointed a stake and a place of gathering for the Saints.

    The following officers were then appointed--namely, William Marks
    to be President; Bishop Whitney to be Bishop of middle ward; Bishop
    Partridge to be Bishop of upper ward; Bishop Knight to be Bishop of
    lower ward; George W. Harris, Samuel Bent, Henry G. Sherwood, David
    Fullmer, Alpheus Cutler, William Huntington, Thomas Grover, Newel
    Knight, Charles C. Rich, David Dort, Seymour Brunson, Lewis D.
    Wilson, to be the High Council; who being respectfully called upon
    accepted their appointment.

    It was then voted that a stake of the Church be established on the
    west side of the river, in Iowa Territory; over which Elder John
    Smith was appointed President; Alanson Ripley, Bishop; and Asahel
    Smith, John M. Burk, Abraham O. Smoot, Richard Howard, Willard
    Snow, Erastus Snow, David Pettigrew, Elijah Fordham, Edward Fisher,
    Elias Smith, John Patten, Stephen Chase, were elected High Council.
    Don C. Smith was elected to be continued as President of the High
    Priesthood [High Priest's quorum]. Orson Hyde to stand in his
    former office, [an Apostle] and William Smith to be continued in
    his standing, [in the quorum of the Twelve.]

    Letters were then read respecting the absence of members on account
    of ill health. It was voted that Harlow Redfield be suspended until
    he can have a trial; and in the meantime that he should not act as
    president of a branch, or preach.

    Voted that John Daley, James Daley, and Milo Andrus retain their
    station in the Church. Voted that Ephraim Owen's confession for
    disobeying the Word of Wisdom be accepted.

    Brothers Edward Johnston, Benjamin Johnston, Samuel Musick, John
    S. Fullmer, Jabez Lake, Benjamin Jones, Henry Our Bough, Reddin
    A. Allred, George W. Gee, Jesse McIntyre, James {13} Brown, Henry
    Miller, Artemas Johnson, Joseph G. Hovey, Robert D. Foster, Fields
    B. Jacaway, Zadok Bethers, William Allred, William B. Simmons,
    William W. Edwards, Sen., William H. Edwards, Jun., Hosea Stout,
    Thomas Rich, Allen J. Stout, Esaias Edwards, John Adams, Daniel
    Miller, Simeon J. Comfort, Graham Coltrin, William Hyde, Andrew
    Henry, Reddick N. Allred, Eli Lee, Hiram W. Mikesell and Thomas S.
    Edwards were appointed Elders of the Church, who all accepted of
    their appointment, with the exception of Thomas S. Edwards.

    John Gaylord was admitted into the Church upon his confession. Abel
    Casto was confirmed by the laying on of hands.

    The meeting then adjourned until Sunday morning; after which six
    were baptized by Joseph Smith, Jun. The assembly was very large.

    The conference met on Sunday morning, the 6th, pursuant to
    adjournment at eight o'clock a. m., when Samuel Williams, Reuben
    Foot, Orlando D. Hovey, Tunis Rappleyee, Sheffield Daniels, Albert
    Milner, David B. Smith, Ebenezer Richardson, Pleasant Ewell, and
    William Helm were appointed Elders of the Church, and were ordained
    under the hands of Reynolds Cahoon, Seymour Brunson, Samuel Bent
    and Alpheus Cutler.

    After some remarks from the President respecting order, and decorum
    during conference, Elder Lyman Wight spoke concerning the duties of
    Priests and Teachers. President Joseph Smith, Jun., then addressed
    the conference, in relation to appointing a Patriarch, and other
    matters connected with the well being of the Church.

    Having now got through the business matters, the President
    proceeded to give instruction to the Elders respecting preaching
    the Gospel, and pressed upon them the necessity of getting the
    Spirit, so that they might preach with the Holy Ghost sent down
    from heaven; to be careful in speaking on those subjects which
    are not clearly pointed out in the word of God, which lead to
    speculation and strife.

    Those persons who had been baptized, were then confirmed, and
    several children received blessings by Elders Cutler, Bent, and
    Brunson. Elder Lyman Wight then addressed the meeting on the
    subject of raising funds by contribution, towards paying for the
    lands which had been contracted for as a settlement for the Church,
    after which contributions were received for that purpose.

    Judge Elias Higbee was appointed to accompany Presidents Joseph
    Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon to the city of Washington.

    The meeting then adjourned until Monday morning.

    Conference met on Monday morning, October 7th, pursuant to
    adjournment.

    The President spoke at some length to the Elders, and explained
    {14} many passages of Scripture. Elder Lyman Wight spoke on the
    subject of the resurrection, and other important subjects; when he
    offered the following resolution, which passed unanimously;

    Resolved: That a new edition of Hymn Books be printed immediately,
    and that the one published by D. W. Rogers be utterly discarded by
    the Church.

    Elder Ezra Hayes was then put upon trial for teaching doctrine
    injurious to the Church, and for falsehoods, which were proven
    against him; his license was taken from him, and he required to
    give satisfaction to those whom he had offended.

    Charges having been preferred against Brother Rogers, it was agreed
    that the case be handed over to the High Council.

    Asahel Perry made application to be received into fellowship, and
    was voted into his former standing.

    After having referred the business not gone into, to the High
    Council, the President then returned thanks to the conference for
    their good attention and liberality, and having blessed them in the
    name of the Lord, the conference was dismissed.

    The next conference was appointed to be held on the sixth day of
    April next.

_Tuesday, 8_.--After conference, this week I was mostly engaged in
attending to the general affairs of the Church, and principally about
home.

_Friday, 11_.--This evening, Elders Young, Kimball, George A. Smith,
Hedlock, and Turley started from Springfield, traveled eight miles on
their journey, and stayed with Father Draper.

_Saturday, 12_.--The Elders of the British Mission left Father Draper's
and pursued their journey toward Terre Haute.

[Sidenote: Death of John Young, Brigham Young's Father.]

This day President Brigham Young's father, John Young, Sen., died at
Quincy, Adams County, Illinois. He was in his seventy-seventh year,
and a soldier of the Revolution. He was also a firm believer in the
everlasting Gospel of Jesus Christ; and fell asleep under the influence
of that faith that buoyed up his soul, in the pangs of death, to
a glorious hope of immortality; fully testifying to all, that the
religion he enjoyed in life was able to {15} support him in death. He
was driven from Missouri with the Saints in the latter part of last
year. He died a martyr to the religion of Jesus, for his death was
caused by his sufferings in the cruel persecution.

_Sunday, 13_.--I attended meeting in the grove. The assembly was small
on account of the cold weather.

_Tuesday, 15_.--In the afternoon I went to Quincy in company with
Brother Hyrum Smith, John S. Fullmer, and Bishop Knight. Quite a number
of families moving into Commerce.

_Thursday, 17_.--The brethren arrived at Terre Haute. Brothers Smith,
Hedlock, and Turley stopped at Brother Nahum Milton Stow's.

[Sidenote: Hardships of the Elders of the British Mission.]

In the evening Doctor Modisett went down to see the brethren, and
appeared to be very much affected to see them so sick, and having to
lie upon the floor on a straw bed that had been put into the wagon at
Springfield, by the brethren, for Elder Young to lie on, as he was
not able to sit up when he left there. When the doctor returned home,
he told Elders Young and Kimball, he could not refrain from shedding
tears to see the brethren going upon such a long mission, and in such
suffering circumstances. Elders Young and Kimball said they thought
the doctor might have relieved them from "their suffering and indigent
circumstances upon their long mission," for he told them in the course
of the evening, that his taxes in that place amounted to over four
hundred dollars, besides having other property to a great amount.

Elder Kimball was very sick; he stopped with Brother Young at Doctor
Modisett's. In the evening Doctor Modisett gave Elder Kimball about
forty drops of morphine, saying it would relieve him of his distress,
and probably he would get a nap. In about fifteen minutes Brother
Kimball complained of feeling very strange; he rose from his seat and
would have fallen, but Brother Young caught him and gently eased him
to the floor, where he {16} lay for some time; and it was by faith and
the close attention of Brother Young and the family that his life was
preserved through the night.

_Friday, 18_.--Brothers Smith, Hedlock, and Turley went on their
journey.

_Saturday, 19_.--The High Council appointed for the Stake of the Church
in Iowa, met at Asahel Smith's, Nashville, and organized; John Smith,
President; Elias Smith, Clerk; Reynolds Cahoon and Lyman Wight were
chosen Counselors to President John Smith, and approved by the Council.
Council organized according to number. [9]

    _Minutes of the Nauvoo High Council, 20th October, 1839_.

    The members of the High Council elected at the October conference,
    met and organized at W. D. Huntington's, where Harlow Redfield
    was restored to fellowship; and voted that this High Council
    disfellowship any and all persons that shall hereafter carry over
    or ferry across the river, any people or freight to the injury of
    said ferry from Commerce to Montrose.

    _Voted_ that the Horse Boat be repaired from the moneys received
    on sale of lots in Nauvoo, and that D. C. Davis be master of said
    ferry boat for the ensuing year.

    _Voted_ that Joseph Smith, Jun., and his family be exempt from
    receiving in future such crowds of visitors as have formerly
    thronged his house; and that the same be published in the _Times
    and Seasons_.

    _Voted_, that this Council disfellowship any and all persons who
    shall knowingly suffer and allow any animal (subject to their
    control) to destroy the crops, fruit, or plants of the earth
    belonging to any other person or persons, and to their injury, and
    that this resolution be published in the _Times and Seasons_.

    Adjourned until tomorrow evening.

    High Council met pursuant to adjournment, and voted that President
    Joseph Smith, Jun., go as a delegate to Washington; and that if he
    went he should have a recommend from the Council.

    _Voted_ that James Mulholland be Clerk for the land contracts, when
    needed by President Smith; that Joseph Smith, Jun., be treasurer of
    said Church, and James Mulholland sub-treasurer.

    {17} _Voted_ that Henry G. Sherwood should set the price upon,
    exhibit, contract and sell town lots in Nauvoo, when needed, and
    report his doings to Presidents Joseph Smith and Hyrum Smith, for
    their approval, and that five hundred dollars be the average price
    of lots, i. e., none less than two hundred dollars, nor more than
    eight hundred dollars.

    _Voted_ that the High Council meet every Sunday evening at Dimick
    Huntington's; that D. C. Davis have thirty dollars per month for
    his services as ferryman; and that these proceedings be published
    in the _Times and Seasons_.

    [Signed] Henry G. Sherwood, Clerk.

_Tuesday, 22_.--Brother James Modisett took Elders Young and Kimball
in his father's carriage and carried them twenty miles to the house of
Brother Addison Pratt; from thence they were carried by Elder Almon W.
Babbitt to Pleasant Garden, and put up with Brother Jonathan Crosby.
Elder Almon Babbitt was preaching in that region with good success; he
had baptized five.

_Saturday, 26_.--Brother Babbitt took Elders Young and Kimball ten
miles on their way to Father Scott's.

King Follett, the last of the brethren in bonds in Missouri, had his
trial and was set free some time previous to this day.

_Sunday, 27_.--John Scott took Elders Young and Kimball on their way
fifteen miles, some part of it in the rain; they were yet very feeble,
and put up at a tavern in Belville, and when the stage coach came
along, took passage, and rode night and day to Willowby, near Kirtland.

The High Council of Nauvoo voted that the Clerk's fees of James
Mulholland be thirty dollars per month; that the treasurer pay Vinson
Knight one hundred and fifty dollars, for the Iowa side of the ferry at
Montrose as per charter.

_Voted_, that Sister Emma Smith select and publish a hymn-book for the
use of the Church, and that Brigham Young be informed of this action
and he not publish the hymns taken by him from Commerce; and that
the {18} Council assist in publishing a hymn-book and the _Times and
Seasons_.

_Monday, 28_.--The High Council voted to build a stone house at Upper
Commerce, to be used for boarding; that Elder Oliver Granger be
requested to assist with funds to print the hymn-book; that Samuel
Dent, Davison Hibbard, and David Dort be trustees for building the
stone schoolhouse in contemplation; and that Alpheus Cutler and Jabez
Durphy be the architects and building committee for said house.

_Voted_, to finish the office of President Joseph Smith, Jun.

_Voted_, that the recommends drawn by Elder Sherwood, recommending,
constituting, and appointing Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon, and
Elias Higbee, delegates for the Church, to importune the President and
Congress of the United States for redress of grievances, be signed by
this Council.

Footnotes.

1. See pp. 573-4, current edition.

2. See pp. 565-567, current edition.

3. See History of the Church, Vol. III, pp. 167-8.

4. "In consequence of the persecutions of the Saints in Missouri, and
the exposures to which they were subjected, many of them were taken
sick soon after their arrival at Commerce, afterwards called Nauvoo;
and as there was but a small number of dwellings for them to occupy,
Joseph had filled his house and tent with them, and through constantly
attending to their wants, he soon fell sick himself. After being
confined to his house several days, and while meditating upon his
situation, he had a great desire to attend to the duties of his office.
On the morning of the 22nd of July, 1839, he arose from his bed and
commenced to administer to the sick in his own house and door-yard, and
he commanded them in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ to arise and be
made whole; and the sick were healed upon every side of him.

"Many lay sick along the bank of the river; Joseph walked along up to
the lower stone house, occupied by Sidney Rigdon, and he healed all the
sick that lay in his path. Among the number was Henry G. Sherwood, who
was nigh unto death. Joseph stood in the door of his tent and commanded
him in the name of Jesus Christ to arise and come out of his tent, and
he obeyed him and was healed. Brother Benjamin Brown and his family
also lay sick, the former appearing to be in a dying condition. Joseph
healed them in the name of the Lord. After healing all that lay sick
upon the bank of the river as far as the stone house, he called upon
Elder Kimball and some others to accompany him across the river to
visit the sick at Montrose. Many of the saints were living at the old
military barracks. Among the number were several of the Twelve. On his
arrival the first house he visited was that occupied by Elder Brigham
Young, the President of the Quorum of the Twelve, who lay sick. Joseph
healed him, then he arose and accompanied the Prophet on his visit
to others who were in the same condition. They visited Elder Wilford
Woodruff, also Elders Orson Pratt, and John Taylor, all of whom were
living in Montrose. They also accompanied him.

"The next place they visited was the home of Elijah Fordham, who was
supposed to be about breathing his last. When the company entered the
room, the Prophet of God walked up to the dying man and took hold of
his right hand and spoke to him; but Brother Fordham was unable to
speak, his eyes were set in his head like glass, and he seemed entirely
unconscious of all around him. Joseph held his hand and looked into
his eyes in silence for a length of time. A change in the countenance
of Brother Fordham was soon perceptible to all present. His sight
returned, and upon Joseph asking him if he knew him, he, in a low
whisper, answered 'Yes.' Joseph asked him if he had faith to be healed.
He answered, 'I fear it is too late; if you had come sooner I think
I would have been healed.' The Prophet said 'Do you believe in Jesus
Christ?' He answered in a feeble voice, 'I do.' Joseph then stood
erect, still holding his hand in silence several moments; Then he spoke
in a very loud voice, saying, 'Brother Fordham, I command you, in the
name of Jesus Christ, to arise from this bed and be made whole.' His
voice was like the voice of God, and not of man. It seemed as though
the house shook to its very foundations. Brother Fordham arose from his
bed, and was immediately made whole. His feet were bound in poultices
which he kicked off; then putting on his clothes he ate a bowl of bread
and milk and followed the Prophet into the street.

"The company next visited Brother Joseph Bates Noble, who lay very
sick. He also was healed by the Prophet. By this time the wicked
became alarmed and followed the company into Brother Noble's house.
After Noble was healed, all kneeled down to pray. Brother Fordham was
mouth, and while praying he fell to the floor. The Prophet arose, and
on looking around he saw quite a number of unbelievers in the house,
whom he ordered out. When the room was cleared of the wicked, Brother
Fordham came to and finished his prayer.

"After healing the sick in Montrose, all the company followed Joseph to
the bank of the river, where he was going to take the boat to return
home. While waiting for the boat, a man from the West, who had seen
that the sick and dying were healed, asked Joseph if he would not go to
his house and heal two of his children who were very sick. They were
twins and were three months old. Joseph told the man he could not go,
but he would send some one to heal them. He told Elder Woodruff to go
with the man and heal his children. At the same time he took from his
pocket a silk bandanna handkerchief, and gave to Brother Woodruff,
telling him to wipe the faces of the children with it, and they should
be healed; and remarked at the same time: 'As long as you keep that
handkerchief it shall remain a league between you and me.' Elder
Woodruff did as he was commanded, and the children were healed, and he
keeps the handkerchief to this day.

"There were many sick whom Joseph could not visit, so he counseled the
Twelve to go and visit and heal them, and many were healed under their
hands. On the day following that upon which the above-described events
took place, Joseph sent Elders George A. and Don Carlos Smith up the
river to heal the sick. They went up as far as Ebenezer Robinson's--one
or two miles--and did as they were commanded, and the sick were
healed." _Leaves from my Journal_, (Wilford Woodruff) Ch. XIX.

5. "Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of
His servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? Let him trust
in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God.

"Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about with
sparks. Walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have
kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand; ye shall lie down in sorrow."

6. This has reference to the Hotchkiss purchase which had just recently
been laid out as part of the rapidly growing town of Nauvoo. It
constituted the north west part of the city, extending some distance
along the river front, and back on to the height of land overlooking
the river bottom.

7. The departure of these two Elders upon their mission to England is
worthy of a more extended notice. A brother by the name of Charles
Hubbard sent a boy with a team to take them a day's journey on their
way. Elder Kimball left his wife in bed shaking with ague, and all his
children sick. It was only by the assistance of some of the brethren
that Heber himself could climb into the wagon. "It seemed to me," he
remarked afterwards in relating the circumstance, "as though my very
inmost parts would melt within me at the thought of leaving my family
in such a condition, as it were, almost in the arms of death. I felt as
though I could scarcely endure it." "Hold up!" said he to the teamster,
who had just started, "Brother Brigham, this is pretty tough, but let
us rise and give them a cheer." Brigham, with much difficulty, rose to
his feet, and joined Elder Kimball in swinging his hat and shouting,
"Hurrah, hurrah, hurrah, for Israel!" The two sisters, hearing the
cheer came to the door--sister Kimball with great difficulty--and waved
a farewell; and the two apostles continued their journey, without
purse, without scrip, for England.

8. See vol. III, pp. 379-381.

9. That is to say, to quote from the revelation establishing the
High Council--"Whenever an High Council of the church is regularly
organized, * * * it shall be the duty of the Twelve Counselors to cast
lots by numbers and thereby ascertain, who of the Twelve shall speak
first, commencing with number one, and so in succession to number
twelve."--_Doctrine and Covenants, Section cii_.

{19}



CHAPTER II.

The Prophet's Journey to Washington--The Petition of the Saints to the
Congress of the United States for Redress of the Wrongs Inflicted upon
Them in Missouri.

[Sidenote: Departure of the Prophet for Washington.]

_Tuesday, 29_.--I left Nauvoo accompanied by Sidney Rigdon, Elias
Higbee, and Orrin P. Rockwell, in a two-horse carriage for the city
of Washington, to lay before the Congress of the United States, the
grievances of the Saints while in Missouri. We passed through Carthage,
and stayed at Judge Higbee's over night, and the next day we arrived at
Quincy.

_Thursday, 31_.--We tarried at Quincy to complete the necessary papers
for our mission. Elder Rigdon was sick.

_Friday, November 1_.--We pursued our journey towards Springfield,
Illinois, and put up with Brother Wilber, where we found Doctor Robert
D. Foster, who administered to Elder Rigdon.

_Saturday, 2_.--Continued our journey, and during the day put up with
a friend on the bank of the Illinois river, so that Dr. Foster, who
accompanied us so far for that purpose, might administer medicine to
Elder Rigdon again.

_Sunday, 3_.--Continued our journey and staid with a friend over night.
Dr. Foster continued to accompany us.

[Sidenote: Progress of the Twelve towards England.]

Elders Young and Kimball arrived at Cleveland, Ohio, {20} about 1
o'clock in the morning; and while waiting for the stage until about
noon, Elders Smith, Turley, and Hedlock, who left them at Terre Haute,
drove up, having picked up Elder Taylor by the way, he having been
left sick by his company in the east part of Indiana. They were in
good health, compared with what they had been, and in fine spirits.
George A. Smith tarried in Cleveland till the next day, to visit his
relatives. Brothers Young, Kimball, Taylor, and Turley rode in the
stage, and Brother Hedlock and Mr. Murray in their wagon to Willoughby,
and from thence they all rode into Kirtland together.

[Sidenote: Canadian Saints En Route for Nauvoo.]

_Monday, 4_.--We arrived at Springfield, and put up with Brother
John Snider. When within one mile of the city, we met William Law
[1] and company with seven wagons from Canada, who returned with us
to Springfield, and tarried while we did, until the 8th. I preached
several times while here. General James Adams, [2] judge of probate,
heard of me, sought me out, and took me home with him, and treated me
like a father.

President Brigham Young and his brother John visited their sister, Mrs.
Kent.

There was some division of sentiment among the Kirtland brethren.

{21} _Thursday, 7_.--The High Council of Iowa completed their
organization at Elijah Fordham's, at Montrose.

_Friday, 8_.--We started from Springfield. Dr. Foster having concluded
to continue on the journey on account of Elder Rigdon's health, which
was still quite poor. We pursued our journey through Indiana towards
Columbus, Ohio. The traveling was bad, and our progress slow.

_Sunday, 10_.--Elder Taylor preached in the forenoon, and Elder Kimball
in the afternoon, in the House of the Lord at Kirtland.

_Thursday, 14_.--Elder Orson Hyde left Commerce, Illinois, intending
to go east as far as Philadelphia. He had just begun to recover from a
four months' illness of fever and ague.

[Sidenote: Elder Taylor Anointed in the Kirtland Temple.]

_Sunday, 17_.--President Young preached in the House of the Lord in the
forenoon, and John Taylor in the afternoon. In the evening, President
Brigham Young anointed Elder John Taylor in the House of the Lord, and
Elder Daniel S. Miles anointed Theodore Turley, all of which was sealed
with the shout of Hosanna.

_Monday, 18_.--President Young visited Brother R. Potter at Newbury,
and returned on Tuesday to Kirtland.

About this time we had arrived near Columbus, where the roads were so
bad, Elder Rigdon's health so poor, and the time so fast approaching
when it was necessary for the committee to be in Washington, that I
started in the stage with Judge Higbee on the most expeditious route to
Washington City, leaving Brothers Rockwell, Rigdon, and Foster, to come
on at their leisure in the carriage.

Elder Brigham Young and company went to Fairport, where they waited for
a steamboat until Tuesday.

Elder Parley P. Pratt and company sold their horses and carriage at
Detroit, and went on to New York City by steamboats, the canal and
railway.

From New York, Elder Parley P. Pratt wrote me on {22} the 22nd,
directed to Commerce, from which I quote the following:

    _Excerpt from Parley P. Pratt's Letter to the Prophet_.

    The churches in these parts are prospering greatly, and are firm
    in the faith, and increasing in numbers continually. The Church in
    New York and Brooklyn now numbers from one hundred and fifty to
    two hundred members, and additions are being made every week. A
    general conference was held in this city on Tuesday and Wednesday
    of this week. Elders present: Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, Samuel
    James, Benjamin Winchester, Elders Foster, Layne, Jenks, Brown,
    Benedict, and myself. Priests present: Addison Everett, Birge, and
    Vanvelver. Many branches of the Church in the region round about
    were represented; several hundred members in all, and the numbers
    still increasing. Great opportunities are open for preaching, and
    crowded houses are the order of the day.

    I have also received letters from Maine and from Michigan, with
    joyful accounts of the spread of the work of the Lord. You would
    now find churches of the Saints in Philadelphia, in Albany, in
    Brooklyn, in New York, in Jersey, in Pennsylvania, on Long Island,
    and in various other places all around us. Our New York meetings
    are now held three times every Sabbath in Columbia Hall, Grand
    Street, a few doors east of the Bowery; it is very central,
    and one of the best places in the city; it will hold nearly a
    thousand people, and is well filled with attentive hearers.
    Brother Winchester has a good hall well fitted up in Philadelphia,
    where stated meetings are held--several every week, with crowded
    audiences.

    In short the truth is spreading more rapidly than ever before,
    in every direction, far and near. There is a great call for our
    books. I am now reprinting the Voice of Warning, The History of
    the Missouri Persecution, and my Poems. There is a great call for
    hymn-books, but none to be had. I wish Sister Smith would add to
    the old collection such new ones as is best, and republish them
    immediately. If means and facilities are lacking in the west,
    send it here, and it shall be nicely done for her; and at least
    one thousand would immediately sell in these parts wholesale and
    retail. The Book of Mormon is not to be had in this part of the
    vineyard for love or money; hundreds are wanting in various parts
    hereabouts, but there is truly a famine in that respect.

    The conference took into consideration the pressing calls for
    this book, and have appointed a committee to raise means for the
    publication of the same, and also to publish it if we can obtain
    leave from you, who hold the copyright. Any hymn-book which Sister
    Smith or the Church will favor us with, shall also be published on
    similar conditions.

    Parley P. Pratt.

{23} [Sidenote: First Issue of the "Times and Seasons."]

Some time this month the first number of the _Times and Seasons_, a
monthly religious paper, in pamphlet form, was published at Commerce,
Hancock County, Illinois, by my brother Don Carlos Smith and Ebenezer
Robinson, under the firm name of Robinson & Smith, Publishers.

_Tuesday, 26_.--At one in the afternoon, Elder Brigham Young and
company went on board the steamer _Columbus_, at Fairport, and went on
towards Buffalo.

[Sidenote: The Elements Obey.]

_Wednesday, 27._--About 1 o'clock this morning the wind arose, when
Elder Brigham Young went on deck, prayed to the Father in the name of
Jesus, when he felt to command the wind and the waves to cease, and
permit them to proceed on their journey in safety. The winds abated,
and he gave glory, honor, and praise to the God who rules all things.
Arriving in Buffalo in the morning, they took the stage for Batavia.

[Sidenote: The Prophet's Adventure En Route to Washington.]

While on the mountains some distance from Washington, our coachman
stepped into a public house to take his grog, when the horses took
fright and ran down the hill at full speed. I persuaded my fellow
travelers to be quiet and retain their seats, but had to hold one woman
to prevent her throwing her infant out of the coach. The passengers
were exceedingly agitated, but I used every persuasion to calm their
feelings; and opening the door, I secured my hold on the side of the
coach the best way I could, and succeeded in placing myself in the
coachman's seat, and reining up the horses, after they had run some two
or three miles, and neither coach, horses, or passengers received any
injury. My course was spoken of in the highest terms of commendation,
as being one of the most daring and heroic deeds, and no language could
express the gratitude of the passengers, when they found themselves
safe, and the horses quiet. There were some members of Congress with
us, who proposed naming the incident to that body, believing they would
reward such {24} conduct by some public act; but on inquiring my name,
to mention as the author of their safety, and finding it to be Joseph
Smith the "Mormon Prophet," as they called me, I heard no more of their
praise, gratitude, or reward.

_Thursday, 28_.--I arrived in Washington City this morning, and put up
at the corner of Missouri and Third streets.

This evening, Elder Brigham Young and company (except Elder Kimball,
who stopped at Byron to visit his sister) rode to Rochester in the
steam cars, and from thence rode all night in a horse coach, and
arrived at ten in the morning on Friday, 29th, at Auburn, New York.
Elders Taylor and Turley proceeded on their way to New York.

The following is a copy of our petition to Congress for redress of our
Missouri grievances:

    The Saint's Petition to Congress.

    _To the Honorable the Senate and House of Representatives of the
    United States of America, in Congress assembled_:

    Your petitioners, Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Elias Higbee,
    would most respectfully represent, that they have been delegated,
    by their brethren and fellow-citizens, known as "Latter-day
    Saints" (commonly called Mormons), to prepare and present to you
    a statement of their wrongs, and a prayer for their relief, which
    they now have the honor to submit to the consideration of your
    Honorable Body.

    In the summer of 1831, a portion of the society above-named
    commenced a settlement in the county of Jackson, in the state of
    Missouri. The individuals making that settlement had emigrated from
    almost every state in the Union to the lovely spot in the Far West,
    with the hope of improving their condition, of building houses
    for themselves and posterity, and of erecting temples, where they
    and theirs might worship their Creator according to the dictates
    of their conscience. Though they had wandered far from the homes
    of their childhood, still they had been taught to believe, that a
    citizen born in any one state in this great Republic, might remove
    to another and enjoy all the rights and immunities of citizens of
    the state of his adoption--that wherever waved the American flag,
    beneath its stars and stripes an American citizen might look for
    protection and justice, for liberty in person and in conscience.

    {25} They bought farms, built houses, and erected churches. Some
    tilled the earth, others bought and sold merchandise, and others
    again toiled as mechanics. They were industrious and moral, and
    they prospered, and though often persecuted and vilified for their
    difference in religious opinion from their fellow citizens, they
    were happy; they saw their society increasing in numbers, their
    farms teemed with plenty, and they fondly looked forward to a
    future, big with hope. That there was prejudice against them, they
    knew; that slanders were propagated against them, they deplored;
    yet they felt that these were unjust; and hoped that time, and
    uprightness of life, would enable them to outlive them. While
    the summer of peace, happiness, and hope shone over the infant
    settlement of the Saints, the cloud was gathering, unseen by them,
    that bore in its bosom the thunderbolt of destruction.

    On the 20th of July, 1833, around their peaceful village a mob
    gathered, to the surprise and terror of the quiet "Mormons"--why,
    they knew not; they had broken no law, they had harmed no man, in
    deed or thought. Why they were thus threatened, they knew not.
    Soon a committee from the mob called upon the leading "Mormons"
    of the place; they announced that the store, the printing office,
    and the shops must be closed, and that forthwith every "Mormon"
    must leave the county. The message was so terrible, so unexpected,
    that the "Mormons" asked time for deliberation and consultation,
    which being refused, the brethren were severally asked, "Are you
    willing to abandon your home?" The reply was, "We will not go;"
    which determination being reported to the committee of the mob,
    one of them replied that he was sorry, for said he, "The work of
    destruction must now begin." No sooner said than it was done. The
    printing office, a two story brick building, was assailed by the
    mob and torn down, and, with its valuable appurtenances, destroyed.
    They next proceeded to the store with a like purpose. Its owner
    in part, Mr. Gilbert, agreed to close it, and they delayed their
    purpose.

    They then proceeded to the dwelling of Mr. Partridge, the beloved
    Bishop of the Church there, dragged him and his family to the
    public square, where, surrounded by hundreds, they partly stripped
    him of his clothing, and tarred and feathered him from head to
    foot. A man by the name of Allen was at the same time treated in a
    similar manner. The mob then dispersed with an agreement to meet
    again on the next Tuesday, the above outrages having been committed
    on Saturday.

    Tuesday came, and with it came the mob, bearing a red flag, in
    token of _blood_. They proceeded to the houses of Isaac Morley,
    and others of the leading men, and seized them, telling them to
    bid their families farewell, that they would never see them again.
    They were then driven at the point of the bayonet to the jail, and
    there, amid the jeers and {26} insults of the crowd, they were
    thrust into prison, to be kept as hostages; in case any of the mob
    should be killed, they were to die to pay for it. Here some two or
    three of the "Mormons" offered to surrender up their lives, if that
    would satisfy the fury of the mob, and purchase peace and security
    for their unoffending brethren, their helpless wives and children.
    The reply of the mob was, that the "Mormons" must leave the county
    _en masse_, or that every man should be put to death.

    The "Mormons," terrified and defenseless, then entered into an
    agreement to leave the county--one half by the first of January,
    the other half by the first of April next ensuing. This treaty
    being made and ratified, the mob dispersed. Again, for a time, the
    persecuted "Mormons" enjoyed a respite from their persecutions; but
    not long was the repose permitted them.

    Some time in the month of October, a meeting was held at
    Independence, at which it was determined to remove the "Mormons" or
    die. Inflammatory speeches were made, and one of the speakers swore
    he would remove the "Mormons" from the county if he had to wade up
    to his neck in blood.

    Be it remarked that up to this time, the "Mormons" had faithfully
    observed the treaty, and were guilty of no offense against the
    laws of the land, or of society, but were peaceably following the
    routine of their daily duties.

    Shortly after the meeting above referred to, another persecution
    commenced; some of the "Mormons" were shot at, others were whipped,
    their houses were assailed with brickbats, broken open, and thrown
    down; their women and children were insulted; and thus for many
    weeks, without offense, without resistance, by night and by day,
    were they harassed, insulted, and oppressed.

    There is a point beyond which endurance ceases to be a virtue. The
    worm when trampled upon will turn upon its oppressor. A company
    of about thirty "Mormons" fell in with twice that number of the
    mob engaged in the destruction of "Mormon" property, when a battle
    ensued, in which one "Mormon" was killed, and two or three of
    the mob; acting in concert with the officer who commanded the
    mob, was Lilburn W. Boggs, Lieutenant-Governor of the state of
    Missouri. When the noise of the battle was spread abroad, the
    public mind became much inflamed. The militia collected in arms
    from all quarters, and in great numbers, inflamed to fury. They
    demanded that the "Mormons" should surrender up all their arms, and
    immediately quit the county. Compelled by overpowering numbers, the
    "Mormons" submitted. They surrendered up fifty-one guns, which have
    never been returned, or paid for.

    The next day, parties of the mob went from house to house, {27}
    threatening women and children with death, if they did not
    immediately leave their homes. Imagination cannot paint the
    terror which now pervaded the "Mormon" community. The weather was
    intensely cold, and women and children abandoned their homes and
    fled in every direction without sufficient clothing to protect them
    from the piercing cold. Women gave birth to children in the woods
    and on the prairies. One hundred and twenty women and children, for
    the space of ten days, with only three or four men in the company,
    concealed themselves in the woods in hourly expectation and fear of
    massacre, until they finally escaped into Clay county. The society
    of "Mormons" after the above disturbances, removed to the county of
    Clay, where they were kindly received by the inhabitants, and their
    wants administered to by their charity.

    In the meantime the houses of the "Mormons" in the county of
    Jackson, amounting to about two hundred, were burned down or
    otherwise destroyed by the mob, as well as much of their crops,
    furniture, and stock.

    The damage done to the property of the "Mormons" by the mob in the
    county of Jackson as above related, as near as they can ascertain,
    would amount to the sum of one hundred and seventy-five thousand
    dollars. The number of "Mormons" thus driven from the county of
    Jackson amounted to about twelve hundred souls. For the property
    thus destroyed they have never been paid.

    After the expulsion of the "Mormons" from the county of Jackson
    as above related, they removed to and settled in the county of
    Clay. They there purchased out some of the former inhabitants,
    and entered at the land office wild lands offered for sale by the
    General Government. The most of them became freeholders, owning
    each an eighty or more of land.

    The "Mormons" lived peaceably in the county of Clay for about
    three years, and all that time increased rapidly in numbers, by
    emigration, and also in wealth by their industry. After they
    had resided in that county about three years, the citizens not
    connected with them began to look upon them with jealousy and
    alarm. Reports were again put in circulation against them: public
    meetings were held in the counties of Clay and Jackson, at which
    violent resolutions were passed against the "Mormons," and rumors
    of mobs began again to spread alarm among the "Mormons." At this
    juncture the "Mormons" desirous of avoiding all conflict with their
    fellow-citizens, and anxious to preserve the peace and harmony
    of the society around them, as well as their own, deputized a
    committee of their leading men to make terms of peace with their
    fellow-citizens of Clay county. An interview took place between
    them and a committee of citizens, at which it was agreed that
    {28} the "Mormons" should leave the county of Clay, and that the
    citizens of Clay county should buy their lands.

    These terms were complied with. The "Mormons" removed to and
    settled in the county of Caldwell, and the citizens never paid them
    value for their lands. Many received nothing at all for their land.
    The "Mormons," by this removal, sacrificed much both of money and
    feeling, but the sacrifice was made upon the altar of duty, for the
    peace of the community.

    Your Memorialists would beg here to give what they believe a just
    explanation of the causes of the prejudice and persecution against
    the "Mormons" related above, and which will follow. That there
    might have been some unworthy members among them, cannot be denied;
    but many aver that as a community they were as moral, as upright,
    and as observant of the laws of the land as any body of people in
    the world. Why then this prejudice and persecution? An answer they
    trust will be found in the fact that they were a body of people
    distinct from their fellow-citizens, in religious opinions, in
    their habits, and in their associations. They were numerous enough
    to make the power of their numerical and moral force a matter of
    anxiety and dread to the political and religious parties by which
    they were surrounded; which arose not from what the "Mormons" had
    done, but from the fear of what they might do.

    In addition, the "Mormons" have purchased of the settlers, or of
    the Government, or obtained by pre-emption, the best lands in all
    those regions of the state; and at the times of speculation, the
    cupidity of many was aroused to possess those lands by driving off
    the "Mormons," and taking forcible possession, or constraining them
    to sell, through fear and coercion, at a price merely nominal.

    After the "Mormons" removed from Clay county, they settled in the
    county of Caldwell as aforesaid.

    Your Memorialists do not deem it necessary for their purpose, to
    detail the history of the progress, the cares, and anxieties of the
    "Mormons," from the time they settled in Caldwell in the year 1836
    until the fall of the year 1838. They would, however, state, that
    during all that time they deported themselves as good citizens,
    obeying the laws of the land, and the moral and religious duties
    enjoined by their faith. That there might have been some faithless
    among the faithful is possible. They would not deny that there
    might have been some who were a scandal to their brethren; and what
    society, they would ask, has not some unworthy members? Where is
    the sect, where the community, in which there cannot be found some
    who trample under foot the laws of God and man? They believe the
    "Mormon" community to have as few such as any other association,
    religious or political. Within {29} the above period the "Mormons"
    continued to increase in wealth and numbers, until in the fall of
    the year 1838 they numbered about fifteen thousand souls.

    They purchased of the Government, or of the citizens, or held
    by pre-emption, almost all the lands in the county of Caldwell,
    and a portion of the lands in Daviess and Carroll. The county of
    Caldwell was settled almost entirely by "Mormons," and "Mormons"
    were rapidly filling up the counties of Daviess and Caldwell. When
    they first commenced settling in those counties, there were but
    few settlements made there; the lands were wild and uncultivated.
    In the fall of 1838 large farms had been made, well improved and
    stocked. Lands had risen in value, and sold for from ten dollars to
    twenty-five dollars [per acre]. The improvement and settlement had
    been such that it was a common remark that the county of Caldwell
    would soon be the wealthiest in the state.

    Thus stood their affairs in the fall of 1838, when the storm of
    persecution again raged over the heads of the "Mormons," and the
    fierce demon of the mob drove them forth houseless and homeless,
    and penniless, upon the charities of the world, which to them,
    thank God! have been like angels' visits, but not few, or far
    between. This last persecution began at an election, which was held
    in Daviess county on the first Monday of August, 1838. A "Mormon"
    went to the polls to vote. One of the mob standing by, opposed his
    voting, contending that a "Mormon" had no more right to vote than
    a negro; one angry word brought on another, and blows followed.
    They are, however, happy to state that the "Mormon" was not the
    aggressor, but was on the defensive: others interfered, not one
    alone, but many assailed the "Mormon." His brethren, seeing him
    thus assailed by numbers, rushed to the rescue; then came others
    of the mob, until finally a general row commenced. The "Mormons"
    were victorious. The next day, a rumor reached the "Mormons" of
    Caldwell, that two of their brethren had been killed in this fight,
    and a refusal had been made to surrender their bodies for burial.
    Not knowing at the time that this rumor was false, they became much
    excited, and several of them started for Daviess county, where
    they arrived next morning, with a view of giving the brethren,
    whom they supposed to have been killed, a decent interment. Among
    the citizens this fight produced a great excitement. They held a
    public meeting and resolved to drive the "Mormons" from the county.
    Individuals began also to threaten the "Mormons" as a body, and
    swear that they should leave the county in three days. When the
    "Mormons" who had gone from Caldwell to Daviess, aforesaid, arrived
    there, they found this state of excitement to exist. They also
    heard that a large mob was collecting against them, headed by Adam
    Black one of the judges of the county court of Daviess county.

    {30} Under these circumstances, and with a view to allay the
    excitement, they called on Mr. Black, and inquired of him whether
    the reports they had heard in relation to him were true. Upon
    his denying them to be true, they then requested him to give
    that denial in writing, which he freely did. This writing they
    published with a view of calming the public mind, and allaying
    the excitement. Having done this, they rested in quiet for some
    time after, hoping that their efforts would produce the desired
    effect. Their surprise can, under these circumstances, be easily
    imagined, when a short time after, they learned that said Black had
    gone before Judge King, and made oath that he was forced to sign
    the instrument, by armed "Mormons," and procured a warrant for the
    arrest of Joseph Smith, Jun., and Lyman Wight, which was placed
    in the hands of the sheriff. It was also reported that the said
    individuals had refused to surrender themselves, and that an armed
    force was collecting to come and take them.

    Your Memoralists aver that the sheriff had never made any efforts
    to serve the writ, and that the said Smith and Wight, so far from
    making any resistance, did not know that such a writ had been
    issued, until they learned it first by report as above related. In
    the meantime the rumor had run over the whole country, that the
    "Mormons" were compelling individuals to sign certain instruments
    in writing, and that they were resisting the process of the
    law. The public mind became much inflamed, and the mob began to
    collect from all quarters and in large numbers, with pretensions
    of assisting the sheriff to serve the process; and here let it
    be observed in passing, that Adam Black had sold the improvement
    and pre-emption claim on which he then resided, to the "Mormons,"
    received his pay for the same, and that through his instrumentality
    the "Mormons" were driven off, and he now retains both their money
    and the improvement.

    As soon as the above reports reached the ears of the said Smith
    and Wight, they determined immediately upon the course they ought
    to pursue, which was to submit to the laws. They both surrendered
    themselves up to Judge King, underwent a trial, and in the absence
    of all sufficient testimony they were discharged. They hoped
    that this voluntary submission of theirs to the law, and their
    triumphant vindication of the charge, would allay the excitement
    of the community. But not so; the long-desired opportunity had
    arrived when the oppression and extermination of the "Mormons"
    might be made to assume the form of legal proceeding. The mob that
    had assembled for the pretended purpose of assisting the officers
    in the execution of process, did not disperse upon the acquittal
    of Smith and Wight, but continued embodied with the encampments
    and forms of a military force, and committing depredations upon
    "Mormon" property. The "Mormons" in this extremity {31} called upon
    the laws of the land, and the officers of the law, for protection.
    After much delay, the militia under Generals Atchison, Doniphan,
    and Parks, were sent to their relief. They arrived on the 13th of
    September, and encamped between the "Mormons" and the mob.

    The above officers made no attempt to disperse the mob, excusing
    themselves by saying, "that their own men had sympathies with
    the mob." After remaining there for several days, those officers
    adopted the following expedient of settling the difficulties--they
    mustered the mob, and enrolled them with their own troops, and
    then disbanded the whole, with orders to seek their several homes.
    The officers went home, excepting Parks, who remained for their
    protection, with his men.

    The "Mormons" made an agreement with the citizens of Daviess,
    to buy out their lands and pre-emption rights, and appointed a
    committee to make the purchase, and to go on buying till they had
    purchased to the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars. While
    these purchases were going on, the citizens were heard to say, that
    as soon as they had sold out to the "Mormons" and received their
    pay, they would drive the "Mormons" off, and keep both their lands
    and the money.

    The mob, when disbanded in Daviess by the generals as aforesaid,
    instead of repairing to their homes as commanded, proceeded in
    a body to the adjoining county of Carroll, and encamped around
    Dewitt, a village built and inhabited by "Mormons;" while thus
    encamped around Dewitt, they sent to the county of Jackson, and
    procured a cannon. They invested the place so closely, that no
    person could leave the town in safety; when they did so, they were
    fired upon by the mob. The horses of the "Mormons" were stolen,
    and their cattle killed. The citizens of Dewitt, amounting to
    about seventy families, were in great extremity, and worn out by
    want and sickness. In their extremity they made application to
    Governor Boggs for protection and relief; but no protection, no
    relief was granted them. When reduced to the last extremity, no
    alternative was left them, but to seek protection by flight, and
    the abandonment of their homes. Accordingly, on the evening of the
    11th of October, 1838, they retreated from Dewitt, and made their
    way to the counties of Daviess and Caldwell, leaving many of their
    effects in the possession of the mob.

    Your Memorialists will not detail the horrors and sufferings of
    such a flight, when shared with women and children. They might
    detail many. One lady, who had given birth to a child just before
    the flight commenced, died on the road and was buried without a
    coffin. Many others, sick, worn out, starved, deprived of medical
    aid, died upon the road. The remnant of "Mormons" from Dewitt
    arrived in Daviess and Caldwell, and found a short relief and
    supply of their wants from their friends and brethren there.

    {32} After the abandonment of Dewitt, and the flight of the
    "Mormons" from Carroll, one Sashiel Woods addressed the mob,
    advising them to take their cannon and march to the county of
    Daviess, and drive the "Mormons" from that county, and seize upon
    their lands and other property, saying that the "Mormons" could
    get no benefit of the law, as they had recently seen. They then
    commenced their march from Carroll to Daviess, carrying with them
    the cannon which they had received from Jackson. On their way they
    captured two "Mormons," made them ride on the cannon, and taunted
    them as they went along, telling them that they were going to drive
    the "Mormons" from Daviess to Caldwell, and from Caldwell to hell;
    and that they should find no quarters but at the cannon's mouth.
    The mob at this time was reported to number about four hundred
    strong.

    The "Mormons" in these distresses, in pursuance of the laws of
    Missouri, made application to Judge King, the circuit judge of that
    circuit, for protection, and for the aid of the officers of the
    law to protect them. Judge King, as they have been informed, and
    believe, gave an order to Major General David R. Atchison to call
    out the militia to protect the "Mormons" against the fury of the
    mob. General Atchison thereupon gave orders to Brigadiers Parks
    and Doniphan. In pursuance of these orders issued as aforesaid, on
    the 18th of October, 1838, General Doniphan arrived at Far West, a
    "Mormon" village in the county of Caldwell, with a small company of
    militia. After he had been at Far West two days, General Doniphan
    disbanded his company, alleging to the "Mormons," as his reason for
    so doing, that his company had the same feelings as the mob, and
    that he could not rely upon them. In a short time General Parks
    arrived at Far West, and also disbanded his company. At this time
    the mob was marching from Carroll to Daviess. General Doniphan,
    while at Far West, directed the "Mormons" to raise a company to
    protect themselves, telling them that one Cornelius Gilliam was
    raising a mob to destroy their town, and also advising them to
    place out guards to watch the motions of the mob. He also directed
    them to raise a company and send them to Daviess, to aid their
    brethren there against the mob which was marching down upon them
    from Carroll. This the "Mormons" did; they mustered a company of
    about sixty men, who proceeded to Diahman. When General Parks
    arrived at Far West as aforesaid, and learned that General Doniphan
    had disbanded his men he expressed great dissatisfaction. The same
    evening on which General Parks disbanded his company as aforesaid,
    he proceeded to Diahman, in order to learn what the mob were doing
    there, and if possible to protect the "Mormons."

    When General Parks had arrived in Daviess, he found that the mob
    had commenced its operations there, which was on the 20th of
    October, 1838. {33} They commenced by burning the house of a man
    [Don Carlos Smith] who had gone to Tennessee on business, and
    left his wife at home with two small children. When the house was
    burned down, the wife and two small children were left in the snow,
    and she had to walk three miles before she could find a shelter,
    carrying her two children all that distance, and had to wade Grand
    River, which was three feet deep. The mob on the same evening
    burned seven other houses, burning and destroying all the property
    that they thought proper. The next morning, Colonel Lyman Wight, an
    officer in the militia, inquired of General Parks, what was to be
    done, as he now saw the course the mob was determined to pursue.
    General Parks replied that he (Wight) should take a company of men
    and give the mob battle, and that he would be responsible for the
    act, saying that they could have no peace with the mob, until they
    had given them a scourging.

    On the next morning, in obedience to this order, David W. Patten
    was despatched with one hundred men under his command to meet the
    mob as they were advancing from Carroll, with directions to protect
    the citizens, and collect and bring into Far West such of the
    "Mormons" as were scattered through the county, and unprotected,
    and if the mob interfered, he must fight them. The company under
    the command of Patten was the same, in part, that had gone from
    Far West by the order of General Doniphan to protect the citizens
    of Daviess. As Patten went in the direction of the mob, they fled
    before him, leaving their cannon, which Patten took possession of.
    The mob dispersed. Patten with his men then returned to Daviess
    county. Patten in a few days after returned to Far West. It was
    now supposed that the difficulties were at an end. But contrary
    to expectation, on the evening of the 23rd of October, messengers
    arrived at Far West and informed the citizens that a body of armed
    men had made their appearance in the south part of the county, and
    that they were burning houses, destroying property, and threatening
    the "Mormon" citizens with death, unless they left the county the
    next morning by 10 o'clock, or renounced their religion.

    About midnight another messenger arrived with news of the like
    tenor. Patten collected about sixty men and proceeded to the scene
    of the disturbance, to protect if possible the lives and property
    of the "Mormon" citizens. On his arrival at the neighborhood where
    the first disturbance had commenced, he found that the mob had
    gone to another neighborhood to prosecute their acts of plunder
    and outrage. He marched a short distance and unexpectedly came
    upon the encampment of the mob. The guards of the mob fired upon
    him and killed one of his men. Patten then charged the mob, and
    after a few fires, the mob dispersed and fled, but Patten was
    killed and another of his {34} men. After the fight and dispersion
    of the mob, Patten's company returned to Far West. The report of
    the proceedings created much excitement. The community was made
    to believe that the "Mormons" were in rebellion against the law;
    whereas the above facts show they were an injured people, standing
    up in the defense of their persons and their property.

    At this time the governor of the state issued an order to General
    Clark to raise several thousand men and march against the
    "Mormons," and drive them from the state, or "exterminate them."
    Major-General Lucas and Brigadier-General Wilson collected three or
    four thousand men; and with this formidable force, commenced their
    march and arrived at Far West. In their rear marched General Clark
    with another formidable force.

    In the meantime the "Mormons" had not heard of these immense
    preparations, and so far from expecting an armed force under the
    orders of the state to war against them, were daily expecting a
    force from the governor to protect their lives and their property
    from the mob.

    When this formidable array first made its appearance, intent upon
    peace, the "Mormons" sent a white flag several miles to meet them,
    to ascertain the reason why an armed force was marching against
    them, and what we might expect at their hands. They gave us no
    satisfaction, but continued marching towards Far West. Immediately
    on their arrival, a man came bearing a white flag from their
    camp. He was interrogated about his business; he answered the
    interrogations, saying they wanted three persons out of Far West,
    before they massacred the rest. Those persons refused to go, and
    he returned back to the camp. He was closely followed by General
    Doniphan and his whole brigade marching to the city of Far West
    in line of battle. The citizens also of Far West formed a line of
    battle in full front of Doniphan's army: upon this Doniphan ordered
    a halt, and then a retreat. Night closed upon both parties without
    any collision.

    On the next day, towards evening, the "Mormons" were officially
    informed that the governor of the state had sent this immense force
    against them to massacre them, or drive them from the state. As
    soon as the "Mormons" learned that this order had the sanction of
    the governor of the state, they determined to make no resistance;
    to submit themselves to the authorities of the state, how
    tyrannical and unjust soever the exercise of that authority might
    be.

    The commanders of the Missouri militia before Far West sent a
    messenger into the town, requesting an interview in their camp
    with five of the principal citizens among the "Mormons," pledging
    their faith for their safe return on the following morning at eight
    o'clock. Invited, as they {35} supposed, to propose and receive
    terms of peace, and under the pledge of a safe conduct, Lyman
    Wight, George W. Robinson, Joseph Smith, Jun., Parley P. Pratt, and
    Sidney Rigdon, went towards the camp of the militia. Before they
    arrived at the camp, they were surrounded by the whole army; and by
    order of General Lucas put under guard, and marched to the camp,
    and were told that they were prisoners of war. A court martial was
    held that night, and they, without being heard, and in the absence
    of all proof, were condemned to be shot next morning.

    The execution of this bloody order, was prevented by the manly
    protest of General Doniphan. He denounced the act as cold blooded
    murder, and withdrew his brigade. This noble stand taken by General
    Doniphan, prevented the murder of the prisoners. It is here worthy
    of note, that seventeen preachers of the gospel were on this court
    martial, and were in favor of the sentence.

    The next morning the prisoners were marched under a strong guard
    to Independence, in Jackson county, and after being detained there
    for a week, they were marched to Richmond, where General Clark then
    was with his troops. Here a court of inquiry was held before Judge
    King; this continued from the 11th until the 28th of November;
    while the five prisoners were kept in chains, and about fifty other
    "Mormons," taken at Far West, were penned up in an open, unfinished
    court house. In this mock court of inquiry the defendants were
    prevented from giving any testimony on their part, by an armed
    force at the court house; they were advised by their lawyers not to
    bring any [witnesses], as they would be in danger of their lives,
    or be driven out of the county; so there was no testimony examined
    only against them.

    In this inquiry a great many questions were asked relative to
    religious opinions. [3] The conclusion of the court of inquiry was
    to send the prisoners to jail upon a charge of treason.

    They do not deem it necessary to detail their sufferings while in
    prison, the horrors of a prison for four long months, in darkness,
    in want, alone, and during the cold of winter, can better be
    conceived than expressed. In the following April the prisoners were
    sent to the county of Daviess for trial: they were then indicted
    for treason, and a change of venue was taken to Boone county. The
    prisoners were sent to the county of Boone, and while on their way
    made their escape, and fled to the state of Illinois.

    That they were suffered to escape admits of no doubt. The truth
    is, the state of Missouri had become ashamed of their proceedings
    against the "Mormons," and as the best means of getting out of the
    scrape, gave the prisoners an opportunity to escape. In proof of
    this, the prisoners have ever since been living publicly in the
    state of Illinois, {36} and the executive of Missouri has made no
    demand upon the executive of Illinois. Can it be supposed that
    the people of Missouri would thus tamely submit to the commission
    of treason by a portion of their citizens, and make no effort
    to punish the guilty, when they were thus publicly living in an
    adjoining state? Is not this passiveness evidence? They knew the
    "Mormons" were innocent, and the citizens of Missouri wrong?

    But to return to the operations of General Lucas before Far West:
    We need only say that the exterminating order of Governor Boggs was
    carried into full effect. After the above-named individuals were
    taken prisoners, all the "Mormons" in Far West, about five hundred
    in number, surrendered up their arms to the militia without any
    resistance. The "Mormons" now fled in every direction--women and
    children, through the dead of winter, marked their footsteps with
    blood, as they fled from the state of Missouri.

    The orders of the governor were, that they should be driven from
    the state or destroyed. About fifteen thousand souls, between
    the sacking of Far West and spring, abandoned their homes, their
    property, their all, hurried by the terrors of their armed
    pursuers, in want of every necessary of life, with bleeding hearts
    sought refuge in the state of Illinois, where they now reside.

    We cannot trespass upon your time by the relation of cases of
    individual suffering; they would fill a volume. We forbear for our
    regard to humanity, to detail the particulars of the conduct of
    the Missouri militia. We could relate instances of house-burnings,
    destruction of property, robbings, rapes, and murder, that would
    shame humanity. One instance as a sample of many scenes which
    they enacted: Two hundred of the militia came suddenly upon some
    "Mormon" families emigrating to the state, and then encamped at
    Haun's mill in Caldwell county. The "Mormon" men and children took
    refuge in an old log house which had been used as a blacksmith's
    shop. On seeing the militia approach, the "Mormons" cried for
    quarters, but in vain; they were instantly fired upon; eighteen
    fell dead; and their murderers, putting the muzzle of their guns
    between the logs, fired indiscriminately upon children, upon the
    dead and dying. One little boy, whose father (Warren Smith) had
    just been shot dead, cried piteously to the militia to spare his
    life. The reply was, "Kill him, kill him (with an oath), he is a
    son of a damned Mormon." At this they shot his head all open, and
    left him dead by the side of his father. About the same time an old
    man by the name of McBride, a soldier of the Revolution, came up to
    them and begged his life; but they hewed him to pieces with an old
    corn cutter. They then loaded themselves with plunder and departed.

    Your petitioners have thus given a brief outline of the history
    of the {37} "Mormon" persecutions in Missouri--all which they can
    prove to be true, if an opportunity be given them. It will be seen
    from this their brief statement, that neither the "Mormons" as a
    body, nor individuals of that body, have been guilty of any offense
    against the laws of Missouri, or of the United States; but their
    only offense has been their religious opinion.

    The above statement will also show, that the "Mormons" on all
    occasions submitted to the law of the land, and yielded to its
    authority in every extremity, and at every hazard, at the risk of
    life and property. The above statement will illustrate another
    truth; that wherever the "Mormons" made any resistance to the mob,
    it was in self defense; and for these acts of self defense they
    always had the authority and sanction of the officers of the law
    for so doing. Yet they, to the number of about fifteen thousand
    souls, have been driven from their homes in Missouri. Their
    property, to the amount of two millions of dollars, has been taken
    from them, or destroyed. Some of them have been murdered, beaten,
    bruised, or lamed and have all been driven forth, wandering over
    the world without homes, without property.

    But the loss of property does not comprise half their sufferings.
    They were human beings, possessed of human feelings and human
    sympathies. Their agony of soul was the bitterest drop in the cup
    of their sorrows.

    For these wrongs, the "Mormons" ought to have some redress; yet
    how and where shall they seek and obtain it? Your constitution
    guarantees to every citizen, even the humblest, the enjoyment of
    life, liberty, and property. It promises to all, religious freedom,
    the right to all to worship God beneath their own vine and fig
    tree, according to the dictates of their conscience. It guarantees
    to all the citizens of the several states the right to become
    citizens of any one of the states, and to enjoy all the rights and
    immunities of the citizens of the state of his adoption. Yet of all
    these rights have the "Mormons" been deprived. They have, without
    a cause, without a trial, been deprived of life, liberty and
    property. They have been persecuted for their religious opinions.
    They have been driven from the state of Missouri, at the point of
    the bayonet, and prevented from enjoying and exercising the rights
    of citizens of the state of Missouri. It is the theory of our laws,
    that for the protection of every legal right, there is provided a
    legal remedy. What, then, we would respectfully ask, is the remedy
    of the "Mormons?" Shall they apply to the legislature of the state
    of Missouri for redress? They have done so. They have petitioned,
    and these petitions have been treated with silence and contempt.
    Shall they apply to the federal courts? They were, at the time of
    the injury, citizens of the state of Missouri. Shall they apply
    to the court of the state of Missouri? Whom {38} shall they sue?
    The order for their destruction, then extermination, was granted
    by the executive of the state of Missouri. Is not this a plea of
    justification for the loss of individuals, done in pursuance of
    that order? If not, before whom shall the "Mormons" institute a
    trial? Shall they summon a jury of the individuals who composed the
    mob? An appeal to them were in vain. They dare not go to Missouri
    to institute a suit; their lives would be in danger.

    For ourselves we see no redress, unless it is awarded by the
    Congress of the United States. And here we make our appeal as
    _American Citizens_, as _Christians_, and as _Men_--believing that
    the high sense of justice which exists in your honorable body,
    will not allow such oppression to be practiced upon any portion of
    the citizens of this vast republic with impunity; but that some
    measures which your wisdom may dictate, may be taken, so that the
    great body of people who have been thus abused, may have redress
    for the wrongs which they have suffered. And to your decision they
    look with confidence; hoping it may be such as shall tend to dry up
    the tear of the widow and orphan, and again place in situations of
    peace, those who have been driven from their homes, and have had to
    wade through scenes of sorrow and distress.

    And your Memoralists, as in duty bound, will ever pray.

Footnotes:

1. William Law was born September 8th, 1809, and was converted to the
gospel through the preaching of Elder John Taylor and Almon W. Babbitt.
He lived in Canada some twenty-five miles south of Toronto, and was now
leading a company of saints from Canada to Nauvoo.

2. Concerning the antecedent of James Adams nothing can be learned
from our church annals. This is unfortunate, since he was truly a
noble character, and remained until his death (1843) a most faithful
friend of the Prophet's. In a book of Patriarchal blessings, given by
Hyrum Smith, is recorded a blessing upon the head of a James Adams,
who in every way would be such a man as the James Adams mentioned in
the text--I mean as to age, and character indicated in the blessing.
This James Adams of the blessing, and who I am personally convinced was
the Prophet's friend of the text, was the son of Parmenio and Chloe
Adams, born at Limsbury Township, Hartford county, Connecticut, 24th of
January, 1783. He is declared by the Patriarch to be of the tribe of
Judah. The blessing was given the 2nd October, 1841.

3. See Vol. III., page 212.

{39}



CHAPTER III.

The Prophet's Efforts at Washington to Obtain Redress of Grievances for
the Saints--Affidavits on Missouri Affairs.

_Saturday, November 30, 1839_.--Elders Young and George A. Smith went
to Brother Isaac Haight's at Moravia.

_Sunday, December 1, 1839_.--The High Council at Nauvoo met at Oliver
Granger's and voted that Hyrum Smith, George W. Harris, and Oliver
Granger, be a committee to send a petition to the legislature to define
new boundary lines of the city of Nauvoo, and also of Commerce, and
do all other needful acts relative to those cities; that Hyrum Smith
furnish the maps and plats for the alteration, and that Seymour Brunson
circulate the petition for signatures.

Voted that Bishop Edward Partridge publish a piece in the _Times and
Seasons_, informing the brethren in the west, that it is improper to
remove from the west for the purpose of locating in Kirtland, Ohio, and
that those who do thus remove, will be disfellowshiped by the council.

    _The Prophet's Letter to Hyrum Smith--Reporting State of Affairs at
    Washington_.

    Washington City, Corner Missouri And 3rd Sts.

    December 5th, 1839.

    Dear Brother Hyrum, President, and to the Honorable High Council
    of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints--to whom be
    fellowship, love, and the peace of Almighty God extended, and the
    prayer of faith forever and ever. Amen.

    Your fellow laborers, Joseph Smith, Jun., Elias Higbee, and agents
    as well as the servants that are sent by you, to perform one of
    the most {40} arduous and responsible duties, and also to labor
    in the most honorable cause that ever graced the pages of human
    existence, respectfully show by these lines, that we have taken up
    our cross thus far, and that we arrived in this city on the morning
    of the 28th November, and spent the most of that day in looking up
    a boarding house, which we succeeded in finding. We found as cheap
    boarding as can be had in this city.

    On Friday morning, 29th, we proceeded to the house of the
    President. We found a very large and splendid palace, surrounded
    with a splendid enclosure, decorated with all the fineries and
    elegancies of this world. We went to the door and requested to see
    the President, when we were immediately introduced into an upper
    apartment, where we met the President, and were introduced into his
    parlor, where we presented him with our letters of introduction.
    As soon as he had read one of them, he looked upon us with a half
    frown, and said, "What can I do? I can do nothing for you! If I do
    anything, I shall come in contact with the whole state of Missouri."

    But we were not to be intimidated; and demanded a hearing, and
    constitutional rights. Before we left him he promised to reconsider
    what he had said, and observed that he felt to sympathize with us,
    on account of our sufferings.

    We have spent the remainder of our time in hunting up the
    Representatives in order to get our case brought before the House;
    in giving them letters of introduction, etc., and in getting
    acquainted. A meeting of the delegation of the state of Illinois
    was appointed today, to consult for bringing our case before
    Congress. The gentlemen from Illinois are worthy men, and have
    treated us with the greatest kindness, and are ready to do all that
    is in their power; but you are aware, brethren, that they with us
    have all the prejudices, superstition, and bigotry of an ignorant
    generation to contend with; nevertheless we believe our case will
    be brought before the House, and we will leave the event with God;
    He is our Judge, and the Avenger of our wrongs.

    For a general thing there is but little solidity and honorable
    deportment among those who are sent here to represent the people;
    but a great deal of pomposity and show.

    We left President Rigdon and others on the road, and received a
    letter from them this day. They were, at the date of the letter, on
    the 20th of November, near Washington, in Pennsylvania, expecting
    to stop a day or two at his brother's on account of his ill health.
    He has occasionally a chill yet, but his illness is not dangerous.
    We expect him here soon.

    We have already commenced forming some very honorable
    acquaintances, and have thus far been prospered as much as we had
    anticipated, if not more. We have had a pleasing interview with
    Judge Young, who {41} proposed to furnish us with expense money.
    We can draw on him for funds to publish our book, and we want you
    to raise some more money for us, and deposit it in the Branch Bank
    in Quincy, to be drawn to the order of Judge Young. Send us the
    amount of your deposit, taking a receipt of the same. You need not
    be afraid to do this. We think from the proceeds of the sale of
    books, we can make it all straight. Do therefore be punctual, as
    much depends upon it. We cannot accomplish the things for which
    we were sent without some funds. You very well know, brethren, we
    were contented to start, trusting in God, with little or nothing.
    We have met with but one accident since we started. The lock of
    our trunk was broken off, and Brother Lyman Wight's petition is
    missing; but we trust there is a copy of it preserved; if there is,
    you will please forward it immediately, with the name and affidavit
    to it.

    For God's sake, brethren, be wide awake, and arm us with all the
    power possible, for now is the time or never. We want you should
    get all the influential men you can of that section of country, of
    Iowa, and of every other quarter, to write letters to the members
    of Congress, using their influence in our behalf, and to keep their
    minds constantly upon the subject.

    Please to forward this to our wives.

    Yours in the bonds of the Everlasting Covenant,

    Joseph Smith, Jun.,

    Elias Higbee.

    P. S.--Congress has been in session for four days, and the House
    of Representatives is not yet organized, in consequence of some
    seats being contested in the New Jersey delegation. They have this
    day succeeded in electing John Q. Adams to the chair _pro tem_.;
    but whether they will get their Speaker and Clerk chosen is yet
    unknown, as there is a great deal of wind blown off on the occasion
    on each day. There is such an itching disposition to display their
    oratory on the most trivial occasions, and so much etiquette,
    bowing and scraping, twisting and turning, to make a display of
    their witticism, that it seems to us rather a display of folly and
    show, more than substance and gravity, such as becomes a great
    nation like ours. (However there are some exceptions).

    A warm feeling has been manifested in the discussion of the House
    today, and it seems as much confusion as though the nation had
    already began to be vexed. We came with one of the Missouri members
    from Wheeling to this place, who was drunk but once, and that
    however was most of the time; there was but one day but what he
    could navigate, and that day he was keeled over, so he could eat no
    dinner. The horses ran away with the stage; they ran about three
    miles; {42} Brother Joseph climbed out of the stage, got the lines,
    and stopped the horses, and also saved the life of a lady and
    child. He was highly commended by the whole company for his great
    exertions and presence of mind through the whole affair. Elias
    Higbee jumped out of the stage at a favorable moment, just before
    they stopped, with a view to assist in stopping them, and was but
    slightly injured. We were not known to the state company until
    after our arrival.

    In our interview with the President, he interrogated us wherein
    we differed in our religion from the other religions of the day.
    Brother Joseph said we differed in mode of baptism, and the gift of
    the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. We considered that all
    other considerations were contained in the gift of the Holy Ghost,
    and we deemed it unnecessary to make many words in preaching the
    Gospel to him. Suffice it to say he has got our testimony. We watch
    the post office, but have received no letters from our sections of
    the country. Write instantly.

    Yours with respect,

    J. S. Jun.,

    E. H.

[Sidenote: Affairs in Iowa.]

_Tuesday, 3_.--High Council of Iowa met at Elijah Fordham's and voted
to come up to the law of tithing, so far as circumstances would permit,
for the benefit of the poor, and that Alanson Ripley remove to Iowa;
and he was ordained Bishop by the Presidency of the Council.

Elder Daniel Avery was instructed to call the Elders together and
organize the Elder's Quorum.

_Saturday, 7_.--The President of the High Council of Iowa proposed the
following questions--Have the brethren a right to exact the payment
of debts which were due them from others, and were consecrated to the
Bishop in the state of Missouri? Six counselors spoke. The President
decided that all such debts ought not to be called for, and that
persons making such demands shall be disfellowshiped by the Church;
which was approved by the Council. Also that all those who sold goods
in Missouri, and were calling for their pay, should be considered as
acting in unrighteousness, and ought to be disfellowshiped; {43} as the
property of the Saints had been confiscated by Missouri.

    _Letter of the Prophet and Elias Higbee to the High Council at
    Nauvoo--Preliminary Hearing of Grievances_.

    Washington City, Corner Of Missouri And 3rd Sts.,

    December 7th, 1839.

    _To Seymour Brunson and the Honorable High Council of the Church of
    Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints_:

    Your humble servants, Joseph Smith, Jun., and Elias Higbee, again
    address you for the purpose of informing you of our proceedings
    here in relation to our business and prospects of success. We deem
    it unimportant to say anything in relation to our journey, arrival,
    and interview with his Excellency, the President of these United
    States; as they were mentioned in a letter lately addressed to
    President Hyrum Smith and the High Council. We mentioned in that
    letter the appointment of a meeting to be held by the Illinois
    delegation, to consult upon the best measures of getting our
    business brought before Congress. They met yesterday in one of the
    committee rooms of the Capitol. All the delegation were present
    except ex-Governor Reynolds--who is now one of the Representatives
    in Congress--and on account of whose absence, the meeting was
    adjourned until today at eleven o'clock; however the subject was
    partially introduced, and Mr. Robinson took a stand against us,
    so far as concerned our presenting claims to be liquidated by the
    United States.

    We took a stand against him, asserting our constitutional rights.
    Brother Joseph maintained the ground in argument against him firmly
    and respectfully, setting forth the injuries that we have received,
    and the appeals that we have made to the judiciary of Missouri,
    and also the governor; their refusals from time to time to do
    us justice; also the impracticability of doing anything in the
    judiciary courts of Missouri--which tribunal Mr. Robinson thought
    was the only proper place for our claims; but he finally said it
    was his first impression on the subject, not having considered the
    matter, but would take it into further consideration.

    Judge Young of the Senate made some remarks in our favor, saying
    he would get the opinion of some of the prominent members of
    the Senate, who were also lawyers, and would report to us the
    next meeting. We met this day according to appointment, and very
    friendly feelings were manifested on the occasion. Our business was
    taken up, and {44} Judge Young stated that he had asked the opinion
    of Judge White of Tennessee, of Mr. Wright, and several other
    members whose names we do not recollect, but were prominent members
    of the Senate. They all declined giving an opinion at present, as
    it was a matter that they had not considered sufficiently to decide
    upon at this time. The meeting, then, after some deliberations,
    decided in our favor, which decision was that a Memorial and
    Petition be drawn up in a concise manner, (our Representatives
    promising so to do), and Judge Young present them to the Senate,
    that they might thereby refer it to the proper committee, with all
    the accompanying documents, and order the same to be printed.

    We want you to assist us now; and also to forward us your
    certificates, that you hold for your lands in Missouri: your claims
    to preemption rights, and affidavits to prove that soldiers were
    quartered on us and in our houses without our consent, or any
    special act of law for that purpose; contrary to the Constitution
    of the United States. We think Brother Ripley and others will
    recollect the circumstances and facts relative to this matter. You
    will also recollect the circumstances of Brother Joseph and others
    being refused the privilege of _habeas corpus_ by the authorities
    of Missouri.

    These facts must be authenticated by affidavits. Let any particular
    transaction of the outrages in Missouri that can be sworn to by the
    sufferers, or those who were eye-witnesses to the facts, be sent,
    specifying the particulars. Have the evidence _bona fide_ to the
    point.

    The House of Representatives is not organized. Much feeling and
    confusion have prevailed in the House for a few days past. The
    House succeeded in electing John Q. Adams chairman _pro tem_.
    on the 5th instant. They have not yet elected their Speaker or
    Clerk. The Senate can do nothing of consequence until the House
    is organized; neither can the President's message until then be
    received. We design taking a paper and forwarding it to you.

    Your brethren in the bonds of the everlasting covenant,

    Joseph Smith, Jun.,

    Elias Higbee.

[Sidenote: Brigham Young in New York.]

Brother Isaac Haight took Elders Young and George A. Smith to Brother
Joseph Murdock's, Hamilton, Madison county, New York, where Elder Young
preached on Sunday, 8th, and spent the week in preaching, and visiting
the brethren. Elder George A. Smith was confined to his room, sick.

This day, the High Council of Nauvoo issued an Epistle {45} to the
Saints west of Kirtland not to return thither. (See _Times and
Seasons_, page 29). [1]

Elders Hiram Clark, Alexander Wright, and Samuel Mulliner arrived in
Preston from America. Their licenses were mislaid on their journey, and
they had some difficulty in making themselves known.

{46} Some time this month, Brother Hyrum Smith wrote a long Epistle "To
the Saints scattered abroad, Greeting," setting forth his sufferings,
etc., in the State of Missouri, and published the same in the _Times
and Seasons_, on page 20 and onward. [2]

_Sunday, 15_.--President Young preached at Brother Gifford's, in
Waterville.

The High Council at Nauvoo voted that Bishop Knight provide for the
families of Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon, and Orrin Porter
Rockwell, during their absence at Washington.

Elder James Mulholland, my scribe, having died, it was voted that debts
contracted for building his house be settled. Also approved of Brothers
Annis, Bozier, and Edmunds building a water mill adjoining the city.

_Monday 16_.--President Young returned to Hamilton.

_Wednesday, 18_.--Elders Woodruff, John Taylor, and Theodore Turley
sailed from New York for England.

_Friday, 20_.--President Young went to Eaton, to see his cousins Fitch,
Salmon, and Phinehas Brigham.

{47} For particulars of our proceedings while at Washington, see my
letters and Judge Higbee's to friends at Commerce, or Nauvoo, as the
place is now frequently called.

_Saturday, 21_.--I arrived in Philadelphia, direct from Washington
City, by the railroad, where I spent several days preaching and
visiting from house to house, among the brethren and others.

    _Letter of Hyrum Smith to Parley P. Pratt--On Printing the Book of
    Mormon in New York_.

    Nauvoo, Hancock County, Illinois,

    December 22nd, 1839.

    Dear Brother Parley:--In consequence of the absence of my brother
    Joseph, your letter has come into my hands, to which I intend to
    reply, and give such instructions, and advise you respecting the
    matters and things of which you write, as I feel led by the Spirit
    of the Lord [to give].

    I was truly glad to hear of the prosperity of the churches in and
    about the vicinity of New York. Truly these things are pleasing
    to the Saints, and I presume to none more so than yourself, who
    was the instrument in the hands of God in planting the standard of
    truth in those regions, around which so many are now rallying.

    You express a desire to have the Book of Mormon, etc., printed
    in New York, etc., etc., and have taken some steps towards
    accomplishing that object. As respects this matter I would say,
    that it is one of great importance, and should be properly
    considered. Not only is the city of New York destitute of this
    book, but there is truly a famine throughout the Union, and another
    large edition is certainly required. But at the same time I cannot
    give any encouragement for the publication of the same, other
    than at this place, or where it can come out under the immediate
    inspection of Joseph and his Counselors, so that no one may be
    chargeable with any mistakes that may occur. I want the books we
    print here should be a standard to all nations in which they may be
    printed, and to all tongues into which the same may be translated.

    Again, as this place is appointed a Stake and a place of gathering
    for the Saints, I think that every facility should be rendered it,
    in order that the Saints may be able to accomplish the great works
    which have to be performed in this generation. I should therefore
    strongly advise, yea, urge you and all the Elders of Israel, when
    they meet with those who have means, and a disposition to forward
    this work, to send them to this place, where they may receive
    counsel from time to time.

    If when Brothers Joseph and Rigdon return, we should deem it
    {48} prudent to avail ourselves of the facilities offered in New
    York for re-printing the Book of Mormon, it is probable that a
    delegation will be sent to accomplish that object. In the meantime
    you will be at liberty to go to Europe, for thereunto are you sent.

    The above observations will apply to the book of Doctrine and
    Covenants, Hymn Book, etc., which publications I long to see
    flowing through the land like a stream, imparting knowledge,
    intelligence, and joy to all who shall drink at the stream. As to
    publishing the Book of Mormon in Europe and other nations, I should
    entirely acquiesce to your proposition. I do not know of any more
    suitable persons for attending to that business than the Twelve. If
    it should be deemed wisdom to have the same published in England
    or elsewhere soon, you will be further advised on the subject, and
    full powers given you immediately on the return of Joseph, who
    is at present in the city of Washington, in company with Elder
    Rigdon and Judge Higbee, endeavoring to get the subject of our late
    persecutions brought before the councils of the nation.

    The families of the Twelve are generally well, but not altogether
    so comfortably situated as I could wish, owing to the poverty of
    the Church. I think it would be well for those who have means to
    spare, to forward the same to their families.

    My love to all the brethren. I am your affectionate brother in the
    bonds of the covenant,

    Hyrum Smith.

    Addressed to Elder P. P. Pratt, New York City.

_Monday, 23_.--President Young went to Waterville with Brother Gifford.
About this time Brothers Rockwell and Higbee arrived at Philadelphia
with my carriage from Washington, where they had been some time,
leaving Elder Rigdon there sick, and Dr. Robert E. Foster to take care
of him.

_Wednesday, 25_.--Elders Wright and Mulliner left Preston for Scotland,
and soon commenced preaching and baptising in Paisley and vicinity.

President Young went six miles north of Rome [New York] to see Brother
Blakesly; returned on the 27th to Waterville, and on the 28th went to
Hamilton.

_Saturday, 28_.--Heber John, son of Willard and Jennetta Richards, died
at Preston, England, aged five months and nine days. He had been sick
nine days with the smallpox, and was buried in Elswick Chapel yard.

{49} _Sunday, 29_.--The High Council of Nauvoo voted to print ten
thousand copies of the hymn-books, and an edition of the Book of
Mormon, under the inspection of the First Presidency at Nauvoo, so soon
as means can be obtained.

[Sidenote: The Prophet in New Jersey.]

_Monday, 30_.--About this time I left Philadelphia with Brother Orson
Pratt, and visited a branch of the Church in Monmouth county, New
Jersey, where I spent several days, and returned to Philadelphia.

The High Council of Nauvoo voted that a committee be appointed to
transact the business relating to the request of the brethren at
Washington as follows--Alanson Ripley, in Iowa; Seymour Brunson and
Charles C. Rich, at Quincy; Zenas H. Gurley, at Macomb; and that
President Hyrum Smith, and Bishops Edward Partridge and Vinson Knight
give the committee their instructions.

_Wednesday, January 1, 1840_.--George A. Smith (who had partially
recovered from his illness) and Elder Brigham Young left Hamilton. The
brethren helped them on their way, and gave them considerable clothing.

_Thursday, 2_.--Brother James Gifford brought them to Utica.

As more positive and official testimony was wanted by the authorities
at Washington, many of the brethren made affidavits concerning their
sufferings in, and expulsion from, Missouri, a few of which I will
insert in my history:

    _Affidavit of Simeon Carter on his Sufferings in Missouri_.

    I, Simeon Carter, certify that I have been a resident of the state
    of Missouri for six years and upwards, and that I have suffered
    many things by a lawless mob; both myself and my family have been
    driven from place to place, and suffered the loss of much property,
    and finally were expelled from the state. I further certify, that
    I belong to the Church of the Latter-day Saints, commonly called
    "Mormons." And I certify that in the year eighteen hundred and
    thirty-eight, both I and my people suffered much, by the people of
    the state of Missouri. And I further certify, that in this same
    year, in the month of November, between the first and sixth, we
    were surrounded by a soldiery of the state of {50} Missouri, in the
    city of Far West, in Caldwell county, both myself and many of my
    "Mormon" brethren, and were compelled by the soldiery--which were
    armed with all the implements of war to shed blood--under a public
    declaration for our entire extermination, to sign away our all,
    our property, personal and real estate, and to leave the state of
    Missouri immediately.

    I certify that I had at that time one hundred and sixty-two acres
    of land, the same which I held the certificate for. I further
    certify that I was obliged to give up my duplicates to help me to a
    small sum to carry me out of the state. I further certify not.

    Simeon Carter.

    Territory of Iowa, Lee County.

    Sworn to and subscribed before me, a justice of the peace for said
    county, this and day of January, 1840.

    D. W. Kilbourn, J. P.

    _Letter of Hyrum Smith to the Prophet and Judge Higbee_.

    Nauvoo. Hancock County, Illinois,

    January 3rd, 1840.

    _To President Joseph Smith, Jun., and Judge Higbee_:

    Dear Brethren:--It is with feelings of no ordinary kind, that I
    write you at this time, in answer to the letters with which we were
    favored. Your letters were truly interesting, and were read with
    great interest by the brethren here, as well as myself.

    We were truly glad to hear of your safe arrival in the city of
    Washington, your interview with His Excellency the President, and
    the steps you have since taken for the furtherance of the object
    you have undertaken to accomplish, and for which you have left the
    endearments of home, and the society of your friends. The mission
    on which you are engaged is certainly an important one, and one
    which every Saint of God, as well as everyone whose breast beats
    high with those patriotic feelings which purchased our national
    freedom, must take a deep interest in. And although there may be
    many who do not value your labors--their sectarian prejudices
    being greater than their love for truth and the Constitution of
    our country; yet there are many who will undoubtedly appreciate
    your services, and will feel it a pleasure to assist you all
    that they possibly can. Conscious of the righteousness of your
    cause--having the prayer of the Saints, (amongst whom are many who
    have shared with you the trials, persecutions, and imprisonments
    which have been heaped upon the Saints in Missouri), and having
    the approval of heaven, I would say, go on, dear brethren, in the
    name of the Lord; and while you are pleading the cause of the
    widow and the fatherless, may {51} He who has promised to be a
    father to the fatherless and a husband to the widow, bless you in
    your undertakings, and arm you with sufficient strength for the
    herculean task in which you are engaged. Your exertions will be
    seconded by the brethren in this region, who are disposed to do all
    they possibly can.

    I had just got ready to start for Springfield when I received your
    letter. I no sooner read it than I abandoned the idea of going
    there. I then made exertion to obtain funds for you in this place;
    but not being able to get any, and hearing that there were brethren
    in Quincy lately from New York, I started off the following day
    and succeeded in obtaining from Brother Herringshaw three hundred
    dollars, which I deposited with Messrs. Holmes & Co., merchants
    in Quincy, subject to the order of Judge Young. The reason why I
    deposited it with them was in consequence of the banks not doing
    any business and refusing to take deposits, etc. I hope that we
    shall be able to raise you some more soon. Brother William Law has
    promised to let us have one hundred dollars as soon as he gets a
    remittance from the east, which he expects daily.

    We have not been able to get much on the city lots since you left;
    not more than enough to pay some wages for surveying, and a few
    debts. Brother Lyman Wight returned the subscription paper a few
    days ago, stating that he had not collected anything since you
    left. In consequence of my health, which has been poor, and the
    coldness of the weather, I have not been able to attend to it
    myself. I hardly think we shall be able to raise the one thousand
    dollars for Mr. William White by the time he will expect it. Elder
    Granger is yet in Commerce, not being able to move in consequence
    of the low stage of water in the Ohio river.

    I received a letter lately from Parley P. Pratt, stating that he
    was in the City of New York, and had published another edition of
    his book, and wanted permission to print an edition of the Book of
    Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants, with a periodical similar to the
    _Times and Seasons_, stating that there were men who had means,
    that would assist in these things. He likewise wanted to get the
    privilege for the Twelve to print the Book of Mormon in Europe. I
    wrote in reply, that if there were any of the brethren disposed
    to aid, and had means to spare for such purposes, to send them to
    this place, so that not only this place might be benefitted, but
    that the books might come out under your immediate inspection. I
    am afraid some have been induced to tarry and assist Parley in
    these undertakings; and had made arrangements with Elder Granger to
    assist in liquidating the New York debts.

    I want a letter from you, Brother Joseph, as soon as possible,
    giving me all the instructions you think necessary. I feel the
    burden in your absence is great. Father expresses a great desire to
    go to Kirtland, {52} along with Brother Granger, who has promised
    to pay his and mother's expenses; would you think it advisable for
    them to go or not?

    The High Council met a few days ago, and took your second letter
    into consideration, and passed some resolutions on the subject;
    appointed committees to get certificates for land, and to get
    all other information they could. Some have gone to Quincy, and
    others to different places. We shall forward from time to time the
    information you desire.

    You will receive enclosed in this a number of duplicates for land
    from Bishop Partridge and others. The Mississippi is frozen up.
    The weather is very cold, and a great quantity of snow is on the
    ground, and has been for some time. Your family is in tolerable
    good health, excepting one or two having the chills occasionally.

    Bishop Knight desires me to inform you, that Brothers Granger and
    Haws have driven into Commerce a large number of hogs. They are now
    engaged in slaughtering them. I think there will be a good deal of
    trade carried on in this line another year.

    You may expect to hear from us soon again. I sent you a copy of the
    deposit I made in Holmes & Co., which I hope you will receive safe.

    I am very affectionately,

    Hyrum Smith.

    P. S.--We have concluded not to send any duplicates in this letter.
    The packages of duplicates will be directed to Judge Higbee,
    thinking they will come more safe to his address.

_Friday, 3_.--Elders Brigham Young and George A. Smith went from Utica
to Albany, on the railway, and put up at the Railroad House.

    _Affidavit of William F. Cahoon--Missouri Wrongs_.

    I hereby certify that in the year 1838 I was residing in Daviess
    county, Missouri, and while from home I was taken prisoner in Far
    West by the militia, and kept under guard for six or eight days, in
    which time I was forced to sign a deed of trust, after which I was
    permitted to return home to my family in Daviess county, and found
    them surrounded by an armed force, with the rest of my neighbors,
    who were much frightened. The order from the militia was to leave
    the county within ten days, in which time my house was broken open,
    and many goods taken out by the militia. We were not permitted to
    go from place to place without a pass from the general, and on
    leaving the county, I received a pass as follows:

    "I permit William F. Cahoon to pass from Daviess to Caldwell
    county, {53} and there remain during the winter, and thence to pass
    out of the state of Missouri.

    "Signed November 10th, 1838.

    "Reeves, a Brigadier-General."

    During this time both myself and my family suffered much on account
    of cold and hunger because we were not permitted to go outside of
    the guard to obtain wood and provision; and according to orders of
    the militia, in the spring following, I took my family and left the
    state with the loss of much property.

    William F. Cahoon.

    Territory of Iowa, Lee county, subscribed and sworn before

    D. W. Kilbourn, J. P.

    _Letter of C. Adams to the Prophet--Cause of the Saints before the
    Illinois Legislature_.

    Springfield, 4th January, 1840.

    Respected Sir.--I had the gratification of the receipt of yours of
    the 16th of December, which gave me pleasure to learn that your
    prospects were, at that early period, in a measure flattering.
    I also saw yours of the 19th December to Mr. Weber. We are now
    consulting and feeling the pulsations relative to your case being
    brought before the legislature, now in session, by a series
    of resolutions, instructing our senators, and requesting our
    representatives to urge relief in your case.

    What will be done, remains yet uncertain; still it is my strongest
    impression, it will be found prudent to get the matter before our
    legislature, for their action thereon. I am happy to learn that all
    our delegation are friendly to your intended application for relief
    in some shape; and it strikes me that the views of the President at
    this period may be the best, and perhaps the only way that relief
    could at this time be obtained; and in that event, be no injury
    to a future application to be restored to all your rights, when
    prejudice shall in a measure have subsided and the true state of
    the matter be more readily received, even by those whose prejudices
    may have closed the avenues to reason and justice in a matter
    identified with the odium so commonly attached to the sound of
    "Mormons." This odium will naturally wear off when they have time
    to learn that "Mormons" are neither anthropophagi or cannibals.

    Your friends are generally well.

    I am, etc.,

    C. Adams.

    To Joseph Smith, Jun.

[Sidenote: Law Suits to be Abandoned]

{54} _Saturday, 4_.--The High Council at Montrose voted to utterly discard
the practice of suing brethren at the law, and that such as do it,
shall be disfellowshiped by this branch of the Church; that Abraham O.
Smoot ordain Daniel Avery President of the Elders' Quorum; and that the
sixth instant be devoted to taking affidavits concerning Missouri.

Elder Young found the brethren in Albany; went to Troy, and
Lansingburg, where he heard Elder Phinehas Richards preach.

_Sunday, 5_.--Elder Young preached at Lansingburg, and returned to Troy
and held a meeting with the brethren.

_Monday, 6_.--Elder Young returned to Albany.

    _Extract from Elder Orson Pratt's Letter to his wife--Reporting
    Movements of the Brethren in the Eastern States_.

    January 6th, 1840.

    I am well and hearty. After mailing the last letter to you in
    Pennsylvania, I went to Philadelphia on Saturday, the 21st of
    December; there I found President Joseph Smith, Jun.; he had just
    arrived from Washington City, where he had been about three weeks.
    Four or five days after, Judge Higbee, with Porter Rockwell, came
    to Philadelphia; they are well. I wrote to Parley P. Pratt to
    come and see President Smith; he did so, and probably will go to
    Washington with him in a few days. I stayed with Brother Smith, in
    Philadelphia, about eight days; we then took the railroad and went
    some 35 or 40 miles, to a large branch of the Church in Monmouth
    county, New Jersey, which numbers ninety members; there I left him
    [President Smith] on New Year's day, and came to New York, where I
    am at present.

    Elder Benjamin Winchester had, when I left Philadelphia, baptized
    forty-five in that city, and several more had given in their names
    for baptism, and scores believing. I preached in Chester county,
    Pennsylvania, about two weeks, and I think I may safely say there
    are hundreds believing. The work is prospering throughout all this
    region.

    Elders Taylor, Woodruff, and Turley sailed for Liverpool, December
    18th, while I was in Pennsylvania. None of the rest of the Twelve
    have yet arrived. Parley P. Pratt has another book printed, larger
    than the Voice of Warning, entitled "The Millennium and other
    Poems," and a piece on the "Eternal Duration of Matter." [3]

    {55} _Letter from John B. Weber to the Prophet--On Supplementing
    the Latter's Effort to Obtain Redreses from Congress_.

    Springfield, January 6, 1840.

    Gentlemen:--Your letter of the 19th ult. came to hand ten days
    after date, immediately after which I called upon many of the
    prominent members of the Democratic party, with a view to unite
    them in their influence in your behalf; all of whom expressed a
    willingness to aid in bringing about justice. But I regret to
    inform you that but few have exhibited that energy in the matter
    which might reasonably be expected from all lovers of liberty and
    advocates of equal rights.

    Your energetic friends were first of the opinion that an
    effort ought to be made by our legislature to memorialize our
    representatives in {56} Congress, to use all honorable means to
    accomplish your desires; but after holding a consultation it was
    believed that such a course would create a party strife here, and
    consequently operate against you in Congress. Therefore it was
    agreed that as many as had friends in Congress should write to them
    immediately, desiring their aid in your behalf.

    If convenient you will please write again. Any information
    respecting your mission will be thankfully received, and made known
    to your people here.

    Very respectfully yours,

    John B. Weber.

    To the Rev. Joseph Smith and his Associates.

    _Affidavit of John M. Burk--Missouri Outrages_.

    I hereby certify that General John Clark and his Aid, on their
    arrival at Far West in Caldwell county, Missouri, came to my tavern
    stand, and without my leave, pitched their marquees in my yard and
    did take my wood and hay to furnish the same, and did bring their
    horses in also, and without my leave, took hay for them, and did
    take possession of my house, and used it for a council house, and
    did place a strong guard around it, so as to hinder any person from
    going in or out, and I myself was not permitted to go in and out;
    for all this I have received no remuneration, and was not even
    permitted to pass out of town to water travelers' horses without a
    permit. The above took place in the first part of November, 1838.

    I also certify that Caleb Baldwin, Lyman Wight, Hyrum Smith, Joseph
    Smith, Jun., and Mr. Alexander McRae, in Clay county, Missouri, did
    apply for a writ of _habeas corpus_ and did not get it.

    John M. Burk.

    Sworn before D. W. Kilbourn, J. P.

    _Affidavit of John Lowry--Ditto_.

    I certify that I saw General John Clark and his Aid, on their
    arrival at Far West, Caldwell county, Missouri, in the yard of John
    M. Burk, and gave orders to their waiters to pitch their marquees
    in his yard, and to take of his wood for fire.

    I also saw Captain Samuel Bogart, with his men, come near my
    dwelling, and did pitch their camp, and took my house logs without
    my leave, and did burn them. I also saw him with the horse of
    Joseph Smith, Jun., in his possession.

    John Lowry.

    Sworn before D. W. Kilbourn, J. P.

    _Affidavit of Jedediah Owen--Ditto_.

    To whom it may concern--This is to certify, that on the day
    following {57} on which the troops arrived at Far West, that two
    men of said troops came to my house, broke open my trunk, and took
    therefrom both money and clothing, and also a number of papers,
    among which were deeds and notes, and also a number of cooking
    utensils, and in consequence of the cruel and inhuman treatment
    which I and others have received from those troops, we are reduced
    to a state of almost absolute starvation; and Daniel Avery and
    myself were appointed as a committee to go out and beg corn and
    meal, or anything we might obtain, that would render assistance or
    relieve us in our suffering condition.

    Jedediah Owen.

    Sworn before D. W. Kilbourn, J. P.

    _Affidavit of T. Alvord--Ditto_.

    I removed my family from the state of Michigan to Clay county,
    Missouri, in the year 1835, where I lived in peace with the people,
    on my own land, eighteen months or more, when the people began to
    be excited in consequence of the emigration of our people to that
    county. The excitement became so great that I was obliged to sell
    my place at half price, and removed to the county of Caldwell,
    where I purchased me a farm, and settled my family, and made a good
    improvement, and was in a good situation to support my family,
    and there lived in peace with the people until the summer and
    fall of 1838, when the mob began to rise, and we were obliged to
    fly to arms in self defense; but notwithstanding our exertion,
    they murdered and massacred many of our people. We applied to the
    governor for assistance, and his reply to us was, "If you have got
    into a scrape with the mob, you must fight it out yourselves, for
    I cannot help you." The mob still increased, until I was obliged
    to remove my family to Far West, and there remained, surrounded
    with mobs of murderers, until General Clark arrived with his army,
    with the governor's exterminating order. Then we were all taken
    prisoners; our arms taken away; they then treated with all the
    cruelty they were masters of, and took possession of whatever they
    pleased, burnt timber, and laid waste town and country.

    I heard General Clark say that he would execute the Governor's
    order; "but [said he] notwithstanding, I will vary so much as to
    give some lenity for the removal of this people, and you must leave
    the state immediately, for you need not expect to raise another
    crop here." Those who were not taken to prison, were permitted to
    return to their homes to make preparations to leave the state.
    Finding I had no safety for myself and family in Missouri, I fled
    to Illinois for safety.

    T. Alvord.

    Sworn to before D. W. Kilbourn, J. P.

{58} _Tuesday, January 7_.--Elder Young took stage for Richmond,
Massachusetts.

    _Affidavit of William Hawk--Missouri Affairs_.

    Montrose, Lee County, Iowa, January 7, 1840.

    I hereby certify, that some time in the month of October, 1838, an
    armed force collected in the county of Carroll, near De Witt, and
    in open daylight, drove a man by the name of Humphrey out of his
    house, and set fire to it, and burnt it to ashes, and then sent
    an express ordering all the "Mormons" to leave the place as soon
    as the next day. The next day they sent another express ordering
    them to leave in six hours, or they would be massacred upon the
    ground. They also fired their guns at different persons traveling
    the road near the town. The "Mormons" were at length compelled to
    leave their possessions, and all removed to Caldwell, consisting of
    seventy and perhaps one hundred families, many of whom were in want
    of the sustenance of life, sick, and some died upon the way.

    About two weeks after this, another armed force invaded Far West,
    took my gun, and compelled me to sign away my property, both real
    and personal, and leave the state forthwith.

    William Hawk.

    Sworn to before D. W. Kilbourn. J. P.

    _Affidavit of Timothy B. Clark--Ditto_.

    Montrose, Lee County, Iowa Territory, January 7, 1840.

    This is to certify that I was at work on my farm on the last of
    October, 1838, when an armed company under General Lucas, came and
    took myself and my three sons prisoners, and threw down my fences,
    and opened my gates, and left them open, and left my crops to be
    destroyed, and while I was a prisoner, they declared that they had
    made clean work in destroying the crops as they passed through the
    country, and they took from me two yoke of oxen, and three horses
    and two wagons, and compelled me and my sons to drive them loaded
    with produce of my own farm, to supply their army.

    I had in possession at the time, four hundred and eighty acres of
    land, and rising of a hundred acres improved, with a small orchard
    and nursery, the necessary buildings of a farm, etc.; and in
    consequence of my imprisonment my fences remained down, and most of
    my crops were destroyed; and further this deponent saith not.

    Timothy B. Clark.

    Sworn to before D. W. Kilbourn, J. P.

    _Affidavit of Urban V. Stewart--Ditto_.

    Montrose, Lee County, Iowa Territory, January 7, 1840.

    This is to certify that about the middle of October, I was driven,
    by {59} the threats of the Daviess county armed force, to leave my
    possessions, consisting of preemption right to a quarter section
    of land with thirty acres under improvement, and a good house. I
    went to Di-Ahman and remained until about the 1st of November, when
    I was driven from there by an armed force under General Wilson. I
    then went to Far West. While at Ondi-Ahman the armed force took
    from me one cow and calf, and a yoke of oxen, one horse and five
    sheep; they also took from me fifteen hogs. While at Far West, they
    took two cows belonging to me, and I saw the soldiery killing the
    live stock of the inhabitants without leave or remuneration, and
    burning building timbers, fences, etc.

    Urban V. Stewart.

    Sworn to before D. W. Kilbourn, J. P.

    _Affidavit of John Smith--Ditto_.

    Lee County, Iowa Territory.

    This day personally appeared before me, D. W. Kilbourn, an
    acting Justice of the Peace in and for said county, John Smith,
    and after having been duly sworn, desposeth and saith, "That in
    the months of October and November, 1838, I resided in the town
    of Adam-ondi-Ahman. Daviess county, Missouri, and whilst being
    peaceably engaged in the ordinary vocations of life, that in the
    early part of November my house was entered by a body of armed
    men painted after the manner or customs of the Indians of North
    America, and proceeded to search my house for fire arms, stating
    that they understood the Mormons knew how to hide their guns, and
    in their search of a bed in which lay an aged, sick female, they
    threw [her] to and fro in a very rough manner, without regard to
    humanity or decency. Finding no arms, they went off without further
    violence.

    "Shortly after this above described outrage, there was a number
    of armed men, say about twenty, rode into my yard and inquired
    for horses which they said they had lost, and stated, under
    confirmation of an oath, that they would have the heads of twenty
    'Mormons,' if they did not find their horses. These last were
    painted in like manner as the first. These transactions took place
    when the citizens of the village and its vicinity were engaged in a
    peaceable manner in the ordinary pursuits of life."

    This deponent further saith, "That the mob took possession of a
    store of dry goods belonging to the Church of Latter-day Saints,
    over which they placed a guard. I went into the store to get some
    articles to distribute to the suffering poor, and the officer
    who had the charge of the store ordered me out peremptorily,
    stating it was too cold to wait on me, that I must come the next
    morning; and returning the next morning, I found the store almost
    entirely stripped of its contents. {60} Thereupon we as a Church
    were ordered to depart the county and state, under the pains and
    penalty of death or a total extermination of our society. Having no
    alternative, (having my wagon stolen), I was compelled to abandon
    my property, except a few movables which I got off with in the best
    way that I could, and on receiving a permit or pass which is hereto
    appended. I then proceeded to depart the state.

    "'I permit John Smith to remove from Daviess to Caldwell county,
    there remain during the winter, or remove out of the state
    unmolested.

    "'Daviess county, November 9th, 1838.

    "R. Wilson, Brigadier-General. By F. G. Cochnu.'

    "I accordingly left the state in the month of February following in
    a destitute condition."

    John Smith.

    Sworn to before D. W. Kilbourn, J. P.

    _Affidavit of Samuel Smith--Ditto_.

    Montrose, Lee County, Iowa, January 7, 1840.

    I do hereby certify, that I, Samuel Smith, made an improvement
    and obtained a preemption right upon one hundred and sixty acres
    of land in Daviess county, Missouri, in 1837. On the first of
    November, 1838, I was compelled to leave the county, by order of
    General Wilson, in ten days. They took without my consent, two
    horses, which have never been returned, nor remunerated for; also
    destroyed my crop of corn, drove off four head of cattle.

    Samuel Smith.

    Sworn to before D. W. Kilbourn, J. P.

    _Affidavit of Daniel Avery--Ditto_.

    Lee County, Iowa Territory, March 5th, 1840. [4]

    I, Daniel Avery, do hereby certify that the following
    scenes transpired in the state of Missouri to my personal
    knowledge--First, in the year 1838, some time in the fall, I was
    called on by the martial law of the state of Missouri, to aid and
    assist to rescue women and children from the hands of a mob, from
    the waters of Grand river, whose husbands and fathers had been
    driven off. We found the house invested by the mob, some of whom
    were in the house threatening the lives of the women and children,
    if they did not leave their property and effects immediately and
    follow their husbands and fathers. One family lost a {61} child
    while in this situation, for the want of care; the women being
    compelled, by these monsters, to provide and cook them food. This
    company of the mob was commanded by James Weldin.

    I also saw about seventy families driven from De Witt by a mob
    commanded by Sashiel Wood. I helped to bury one woman the first
    night, who had been confined in childbed a night or two before, and
    could not endure the sufferings.

    The next scene I saw I was peaceably traveling the road; a man by
    the name of Patrick O'Banion was shot dead at my feet. We advanced
    a little further, when two men were killed and several wounded.
    I afterwards learned that this gang of mobbers was commanded by
    Samuel Bogart.

    In consequence of being pursued out of the state, by this lawless
    mob, I was not an eye witness to the many thousand wicked acts
    committed by the Governor's exterminating militia.

    Daniel Avery.

    Sworn to before D. W. Kilbourn, J. P.

_Wednesday, March 11_.

    _Affidavit of James Powell--Ditto_.

    Illinois, Adams County, March 11, 1840.

    I, James Powell, do certify, that I was a citizen of the state of
    Missouri in 1838. I solemnly declare that while I was peaceably
    traveling to one of my nearest neighbors, I was assaulted by a
    company of men, to the number of five--Autherston Wrathey, John
    Gardner, Philomen Ellis, Jesse Clark, and Ariel Sanders. First they
    threw a stone and hit me between the shoulders, which very much
    disabled me; they then shot at me, but did not hit me. One of them
    then struck me with his gun, and broke my skull about six inches--a
    part of my brain ran out. I have had fourteen pieces of bone taken
    out of my skull. My system is so reduced that I have not done a
    day's work since.

    I know no reason why they should have done [this act], as I did not
    belong to the Mormon Church, neither had I ever heard one preach.
    In this situation I was forced to leave the state forthwith. I was
    carried three days without having my head dressed. When I arrived
    at Huntsville, Doctor Head offered me assistance. I refer to him
    for further testimony.

    James Powell.

    Attest, John Smith.

    We certify that the foregoing affidavit of James Powell's is true
    and correct, as we stood by and saw it with our eyes. We also heard
    them {62} say they would kill the Mormons, if they did not clear
    out. We carried the wounded man in our wagon, till he was out of
    reach of the mob.

    Peter Wimmer,

    Susan Wimmer,

    Ellen Wimmer.

    Sworn to before William Oglesby, J. P.

    _Affidavit of John Smith--Ditto_.

    Illinois, Columbus, Adams County, March 11, 1840.

    I, John Smith, certify that I was a resident in the state
    of Missouri in 1838, when I was driven from my house, and a
    pre-emption right, and forbid to stay in the state, [the mob]
    threatening me if I did not go forthwith. I took my family and
    pursued my journey one hundred miles. In consequence of cold, snow,
    water and ice at the inclement season in which I was driven, I fell
    sick, and for four weeks I was unable to travel; during which time
    I was threatened daily; yet I was so sick it was considered by many
    that I could not live, and was compelled to start when I was not
    able to sit up through the day. I landed in Illinois; the long and
    fatiguing journey, lying out in the cold, open air, proved too much
    for my companion; it threw her into a violent fever, with which she
    died. Many others in the company took sick and died with the same
    hard fare.

    John Smith.

    Sworn to before William Oglesby, J. P.

    _Affidavit of Smith Humphrey--Ditto_.

    Illinois, Adams County, March 16, 1840.

    I, Smith Humphrey, certify that I was a citizen of Missouri in
    eighteen hundred and thirty-eight; and some time in the month of
    October, of the same year, I was fallen upon by a mob commanded by
    Hyrum Standley. He took my goods out of my house; and said Standley
    set fire to my house, and burnt it before my eyes, and ordered me
    to leave the place forthwith. I removed from De Witt to Caldwell
    county, where I was again assailed by Governor Bogg's exterminating
    militia. They took me prisoner, and robbed my wagon of four hundred
    dollars in cash, and one thousand dollars' worth of goods, and
    drove me out of the state.

    Smith Humphrey.

    Sworn to before C. M. Woods, Clerk of Circuit Court.

    _Affidavit of Henry Root--Ditto_.

    Quincy, Illinois, 16th March, 1840.

    This is to certify that I, Henry Root, am, and was a citizen
    of {63} De Witt, Carroll county, Missouri, at the time of the
    persecutions (known by the name of the "Mormon War") commenced and
    terminated between the citizens of said state of Missouri and the
    Mormons; that in the fall of 1838, in the month of September, a mob
    (under no regular authority) headed by William W. Austin, Sen.,
    consisting of from one hundred to one hundred and fifty men, came
    into De Witt and ordered the Mormons to leave that place within
    ten days from that time; that if they did not leave, they would be
    driven from there by force.

    The Mormons did not leave; the appointed time came, and the mob
    came, armed and equipped for war. The Mormon citizens petitioned
    to the governor of the state, but no relief came. They sent to the
    general of the brigade [in that locality], who ordered the militia
    to repair to De Witt to disperse the mob. On the arrival of the
    militia, Brigadier-General Parks told me the Mormons had better
    leave their property and go off, as his men were prejudiced against
    them, and he could do them no good, nor relieve them. With that the
    Mormons left.

    Henry Root.

    Sworn to before C. M. Woods, Clerk of Circuit Court, Adams county,
    Illinois.

    _Affidavit of Joseph Clark--Ditto_.

    Quincy, Illinois, March 16, 1840.

    I, Joseph Clark, certify that I was a citizen of the state of
    Missouri in 1838; and when peaceably traveling the highway, I was
    shot at twice by Governor Boggs' exterminating militia, commanded
    by Major-General John B. Clark.

    Joseph Clark.

    Sworn to before C. M. Woods, Clerk of Circuit Court, Adams County
    Illinois.

    _Affidavit of Thomas D. Casper--Ditto_.

    Quincy, Illinois, March 16th, 1840.

    This is to certify that I, Thomas D. Casper, was a resident of
    the state of Missouri in the year 1838. I was not a member of the
    Church of Mormons or Latter-day Saints; but witnessed the following
    acts of distress: As I was on business, I inquired for Perry
    Moppin, and learned that he, with Samuel Snowden, Esq., had gone
    after Mr. Wilson, a Mormon, and had threatened and sworn to take
    his life if he did not tell his name; and they swore they had the
    tool to take his life if he had not told them his name.

    Further they agreed that the Mormons should leave the country of
    Missouri except they would deny the faith, or their religion. And
    I {64} heard Anthony McCustian say that he would head a mob in any
    case, to prevent the lawyers from attending to any case of their
    (the Mormons') grievances; and he was a postmaster. And I saw two
    men that said they had been at Haun's mill at the murder; and one
    by the name of White, and the other Moppin stated that he had slain
    three Mormons. And I, Thomas D. Casper, witnessed other things too
    tedious to mention; and solemnly swear, before God and men, that
    what is here written is a true statement of facts relative to the
    suffering of the Mormons in the state of Missouri.

    Thomas D. Casper.

    _Affidavit of Jesse W. Johnston--Ditto_.

    Quincy, Illinois, March 16, 1840.

    I, Jesse W. Johnston, certify that the following circumstances took
    place in the State of Missouri, while I was a resident of that
    state, viz.: I was taken prisoner by Governor Boggs' exterminating
    militia. I saw one man killed belonging to the Mormon Church, and
    was forced by them to take corn out of the fields of the Mormon
    Church without leave. This was in the fall of 1838.

    Jesse W. Johnston.

    Sworn to before C. M. Woods, Clerk of the Circuit Court, Adams
    County, Illinois.

    _Affidavit of Owen Cole--Ditto_.

    Quincy, Illinois, March 17, 1840.

    This is to certify that I, Owen Cole, was a resident of Caldwell
    county, state of Missouri, and while residing at my dwelling house,
    the militia under Governor Boggs, and by his orders, plundered my
    house, and shot me through my thigh. My damage sustained by the
    militia, by being driven from the state, besides my wound, was five
    hundred dollars. The militia men were quartered on the lands of the
    people called Mormons, contrary to the laws and Constitution of the
    state. I hereby certify this to be a true statement.

    Owen Cole.

    Sworn to before C. M. Woods, Clerk Circuit Court.

    _Affidavit of Ezekiel Maginn--Ditto_.

    Quincy, Illinois, March 17, 1840.

    I, Ezekiel Maginn, certify that I was a citizen of the state of
    Missouri in the year 1838, and was an eye witness to the following
    facts--First, I saw the militia, called for by Governor Boggs'
    exterminating order, enter the house of Lyman Wight, and take from
    it a bed and bedding, {65} pillows, and dishes, personally known to
    me to be his property.

    Ezekiel Maginn.

    Sworn to before C. M. Woods, Clerk Circuit Court, Adams County.

    _Affidavit of Addison Green--Ditto_.

    Quincy, March 17, 1840.

    I, Addison Green, do certify that in the month of October, one
    thousand eight hundred and thirty-eight, when I was peaceably
    walking the highroad in Ray county, state of Missouri, I was
    molested and taken prisoner by ten armed men, who took from me
    one double-barrel fowling piece and equipage, threatening to blow
    out my brains and swore that if I was a Mormon they would hang me
    without further ceremony. They had previously been to my lodging
    and taken my horse, saddle, and bridle. All was then taken into the
    woods about one mile to Bogart's camp.

    I was kept a prisoner until the next morning, when I was let go;
    but have not obtained any part of my property, which was worth
    about one hundred and fifty dollars.

    A. Green.

    Sworn to before John H. Holton, notary public.

    _Affidavit of John P. Greene--Ditto_.

    I, John P. Greene, was in company with several of my neighbors
    walking the road in peace, when one of our company, a young man, by
    name of O'Banion, was shot down at my side, being shot by a company
    of mobbers; and soon after this we were fired upon again, and two
    more were killed and several others wounded. This was about the
    25th day of October, one thousand eight hundred and thirty-eight,
    in the state of Missouri, and I do hereby certify the above to be
    true according to the best of my knowledge.

    John P. Greene

    Sworn to before John H. Holton, notary public.

    _Affidavit of Asahel A. Lathrop--Ditto_.

    This is to certify that I, Asahel A. Lathrop, was a citizen of the
    state of Missouri, at the time the difficulty originated between
    the people called Mormons and the [other] inhabitants of the
    aforesaid state, and herein give a statement of the transactions
    that came under my observation, according to the best of my
    recollection.

    I settled in Missouri in the summer of 1838, in Caldwell county,
    where I purchased land and erected buildings. The said land I now
    have a deed of; and in the fall I purchased a claim on what is
    called the East Fork of Grand River, together with a large stock of
    cattle and {66} horses, sheep and hogs; it being some sixty miles
    from the aforesaid county where I first located; and moved on to
    the latter place, supposing that I was at peace with all men; but
    I found by sad experience that I was surrounded by enemies; for in
    the fall of 1838, whilst at home with my family, I was notified by
    a man by the name of James Welden, that the people of Livingston
    county, had met at the house of one Doctor William P. Thompson,
    then living in the attached part of said county, for the purpose of
    entering into measures respecting the people called Mormons; and
    the same Welden was a member of the same, and also the aforesaid
    William P. Thompson was a justice of the peace; and they all
    jointly agreed to drive every Mormon from the state; and notified
    me that I must leave immediately, or I would be in danger of losing
    my life.

    All this time some of my family were sick; but after listening to
    the entreaties of my wife to flee for safety, I committed them into
    the hands of God and left them, it being on Monday morning; and in
    a short time after I left, there came some ten or fifteen men to my
    house, and took possession of the same, and compelled my wife to
    cook for them, and also made free to take such things as they saw
    fit; and whilst in this situation, my child died, which I have no
    reason to doubt was for the want of care; which, owing to the abuse
    she received, and being deprived of rendering that care she would,
    had she been otherwise situated. My boy was buried by the mob, my
    wife not being able to pay the last respects to her child.

    I went from my home into Daviess county and applied to Austin A.
    King and General Atchison for advice, as they were acting officers
    in the state of Missouri. There were men called out to go and
    liberate my family, which I had been absent from some ten or
    fifteen days; and on my return I found the remainder of my family
    confined to their beds, not being able the one to assist the other,
    and my house guarded by an armed force.

    I was compelled to remove my family in this situation, on a bed to
    a place of safety. This, together with all the trouble, and for
    the want of care, was the cause of the death of the residue of
    my family, as I have no doubt; which consisted of a wife and two
    more children; as they died a few days after their arrival at my
    friend's. Such was my situation, that I was obliged to assist in
    making their coffins.

    I will give the names of some of the men that have driven me from
    my house and abused my family; those that I found at my house on
    my return were Samuel Law, Calvin Hatfield, Stanley Hatfield, Andy
    Hatfield; and those that were leading men were James Welden, Doctor
    William P. Thompson, a justice of the peace, and William Cochran,
    and many others, the names I do not recollect.

    {67} I have also seen men abused in various ways; and that whilst
    they were considered prisoners; such as the mob cocking their
    guns and swearing that they would shoot, with their guns to their
    face, and the officers of the militia, so called, standing by
    without uttering a word; and in these councils they have said if a
    Missourian should kill a Mormon he should draw a pension, same as a
    soldier of the Revolution.

    I was also compelled to give up my gun, and the terms were, I was
    to leave the aforesaid state of Missouri, or be exterminated. My
    property is yet remaining in said state, whilst I am deprived of
    the control of the same.

    Written this 17th day of March, 1840.

    Asahel A. Lathrop.

    Sworn to before D. W. Kilburn, J. P., Lee county, Iowa Territory.

    _Affidavit of Burr Riggs_.

    I, Burr Riggs, of the town of Quincy, and state of Illinois, do
    hereby certify that in the year 1836, when moving to the state of
    Missouri, with my family and others, we were met in Ray county, in
    said state, by a mob of one hundred and fourteen armed men, who
    commanded us not to proceed any further, but to return, or they
    would take our lives; and the leader stepped forward at the same
    time, and cocked his piece. We turned round with our team; and the
    mob followed us about six miles and left us.

    Some time after this I moved to Caldwell county, in said state, and
    purchased about two hundred acres of land, and a village lot, on
    which I erected a dwelling house, staked, and commenced improving
    my land, and had, at the time I was driven away, about forty acres
    of corn, vegetables, etc.; and in the year 1838, in the month
    of November, was compelled to leave my house and possessions in
    consequence of Governor Boggs' exterminating order, without means
    sufficient to bear my expense out of the state.

    Given under my hand at Quincy, Illinois, 17th March, 1840.

    Burr Riggs.

    Sworn to before C. M. Woods, Clerk of the Circuit Court, Adams
    county, Illinois.

    _Affidavit of Simons P. Curtis_.

    I, Simons P. Curtis, a resident of Quincy, Adams county, Illinois,
    certify that in the year 1838, I was a citizen of Caldwell county,
    Missouri, residing in the city of Far West. Also that I went in
    search of {68} a lost steer; and passing by Captain Bogart's camp,
    while he was guarding the city, I saw the hide and feet of said
    steer, which I knew to be mine; the flesh of which I suppose they
    applied to their own use.

    I also certify that Wiley E. Williams, one of the Governor's aids,
    who was gunkeeper, caused me to pay thirty-seven and a half cents
    to him. I also paid twenty-five cents to a justice of the peace
    to qualify me to testify that the gun was mine. The said Wiley E.
    Williams is said to be the one that carried the story to Governor
    Boggs, which story was the cause of the exterminating order being
    issued, as stated by the Governor in said order.

    Simons P. Curtis.

    Sworn to before C. M. Woods, Clerk Circuit Court, Adams County,
    Illinois.

    _Affidavit of Elisha H. Groves_.

    I, Elisha H. Groves, of the town of Quincy, and state of Illinois,
    upon oath say, that I was a resident of Daviess county, in the
    state of Missouri, and that on the 16th day of November, in the
    year of our Lord, 1838, Judge Vinson Smith and others came to my
    house and ordered myself and family, Levi Taylor, David Osborn and
    others, to leave our possessions which we had bought of Government
    and paid our money for the same, saying we must within three days
    leave the county or they would take our lives, for there was no law
    to save us after that time. In consequence of those proceedings,
    together with Governor Boggs' exterminating order, we were
    compelled to leave the state of Missouri. Furthermore this deponent
    saith not.

    Given under my hand at Quincy, the 17th day of March, A. D. 1840.

    Elisha H. Groves.

    Sworn to before C. M. Woods, Clerk Circuit Court.

    _Affidavit of Jacob Foutz_.

    Quincy, Illinois, March 17, A. D. 1840.

    This is to certify that I was a citizen, resident of Caldwell
    county, Missouri, at the time Governor Boggs' exterminating order
    was issued; and that I was quartered on by the mob militia, without
    my leave or consent at different times, and at one time by William
    Mann, Hiram Cumstock, and brother, who professed to be the captain;
    also Robert White; and that I was at the murder at Haun's mill,
    and was wounded; and that I was driven from the state, to my
    inconvenience, and {69} deprived of my freedom, as well as to my
    loss of at least four hundred dollars.

    Jacob Foutz.

    Sworn to before C. M. Woods, Clerk Circuit Court.

    _Affidavit of Frederick G. Williams_.

    I do certify that I was a resident of Caldwell county, in the
    State of Missouri, in the year of our Lord 1838, and owned land
    to a considerable amount, building lots, etc., in the village of
    Far West; and in consequence of mobocracy, together with Governor
    Boggs' exterminating order, was compelled to leave the state under
    great sacrifice of real and personal property, which has reduced
    and left myself and family in a state of poverty, with a delicate
    state of health, in an advanced stage of life. Furthermore this
    deponent saith not.

    Given under my hand at Quincy, Illinois, March 17, 1840.

    Frederick G. Williams.

    Sworn to before C. M. Woods, Clerk Adams county, Illinois.

    _Statement of James Sloan_.

    James Sloan made affidavit at Quincy, that the officers of the
    militia under the exterminating order of Governor Boggs in Missouri
    in 1838, took possession, carried off and destroyed a store of
    goods, of several hundred dollars' value, belonging to the people
    called "Mormons," in Daviess county; that his life was threatened,
    his property taken, and he was obliged to flee the state with his
    family, greatly to his disadvantage.

    _Affidavit of David Shumaker_.

    Quincy, Illinois, Adams County, March 18, 1840.

    I, Jacob Shumaker, do certify that I went back to the state of
    Missouri about the first of October last, with the calculation to
    live with my family, but finding it impossible, as the mob, say to
    the amount of twenty or thirty of them, surrounded my house, and
    whilst they were quarreling about me, what they should do, and in
    what way they should dispose of me, I crept out of the back window
    and made my escape; and leaving my family to their most scandalous
    abuses; my wife and oldest daughter barely escaping from their
    unholy designs.

    I was thus a second time obliged to leave the state, or remain
    at the risk of my life. The former alternative I chose. My loss
    sustained by the above-mentioned abuses was not less than three
    hundred dollars. A lot of land containing forty acres, for which
    I paid four dollars per acre, situated in Caldwell county, was
    unjustly and unlawfully taken {70} from me, and is still retained
    by some person or persons to me unknown. I hereby certify that the
    above is a true statement.

    Jacob Shumaker.

    Sworn to before C. M. Woods.

    _Affidavit of Levi Richards_.

    I, Levi Richards, a resident of Quincy, Adams county Illinois,
    practitioner of medicine, certify that in the year one thousand
    eight hundred and thirty-eight, I was a citizen of Far West,
    Caldwell county, Missouri, and that in the fall of said year, I
    saw the city invaded by a numerous armed soldiery, who compelled
    its inhabitants to surrender, give up their firearms, and submit
    to their dictation. They then set a strong guard around the city,
    thereby preventing egress or ingress, without special permission.
    Then they collected the citizens together upon the public square,
    formed around them a strong guard of soldiers, and then at the
    mouths of their rifles, compelled them to sign what was termed a
    deed of trust, thereby depriving them of all their property and
    civil rights.

    This occupied several days of most inclement weather, when they
    were brought to the same order by General Clark, and I judge some
    forty or fifty were made special prisoners by him. At this time he
    delivered his speech to the "Mormons," which has been published,
    and which is substantially correct. I was compelled by a company
    of men armed with rifles, to leave my house, and go to captain
    Bogart's camp, (he commanded, as I understood, a part of the guard
    which surrounded the city,) upon an indirect charge or insinuation;
    was detained a prisoner two days, examined, and liberated. I
    then asked the clerk of the company, who had been my keeper, the
    following questions, which he readily answered:

    Were those men who massacred the "Mormons" at Haun's mill, out
    under the Governor's order, or were they mobbers?

    A. Mobbers.

    Are Captain Cornelius Gilliam and his company out by legal
    authority, or are they mobbers?

    A. Mobbers.

    Where are those mobbers now?

    A. They have joined the army.

    This company [Gilliam's] at the surrender of Far West were painted
    like Indians. The army wore a badge of red (blood). I saw a large
    amount of lumber and timber destroyed, and used for fuel by the
    soldiers. The destruction of cattle, hogs, etc., seemed to be their
    sport, as their camp and the fields testified when they withdrew.
    An excellent gun was taken from me, which I have never seen or
    heard of since. A {71} gun that was left in my care was taken at
    the same time, which I afterwards found with Wiley E. Williams of
    Richmond, (reputed one of the Governor's aids,) to obtain which
    I had to prove property, affirm before a magistrate and pay said
    Williams fifty cents.

    I was called to extract lead, dress the wounds, etc., for several
    persons (Saints) who were shot in the above siege, two of whom
    died. Immediately previous to the above transactions, and for a
    long time before, the citizens of Caldwell, and particularly Far
    West, were called upon to watch for mobs by day and guard against
    them by night, till it became a burden almost intolerable.

    Levi Richards.

    Sworn to before C. M. Woods. Clerk Circuit Court, Adams county,
    Illinois

    _Affidavit of Gibson Gates_.

    I, Gibson Gates, do hereby certify that I was residing in Jackson
    county, Missouri, in the fall of the year, 1833, and had been
    for the space of about one year. I was at a meeting one day for
    worship, when a man by the name of Masters came to us, stating that
    he was sent by the mob to inform us that if we would forsake our
    religion, they were willing to be our brethren and fight for us;
    "but if not," said he, "our young men are ready, and we can scarce
    constrain them from falling upon you and cutting you to pieces."

    Soon after this there came a large company of men, armed, to my
    place, and with much threatening and profane words, ordered me to
    be gone by the next day, or they would kill me and my family; in
    consequence of which threatening, we quit our house in the month
    of November, leaving most of our effects; suffering very much with
    cold, fatigue and hunger, we took [set out] on the prairie, and
    went southward twenty miles or more, where we stayed a few weeks.
    But still being threatened by the mob, we removed to Clay county,
    where we lived in peace until the fall of 1838, when a mob arose
    against the people of the Church of Latter-day Saints, when we were
    again obliged to leave our home, and seek safety in another place
    for a few weeks. When we returned our house had been broken open,
    and the lock of a trunk broken open, and the most valuable contents
    thereof taken away; the most of our bedding and furniture was
    either stolen or destroyed; and we were then ordered to leave the
    state.

    Gibson Gates.

    Sworn to before David W. Kilbourn, J P.

    _Affidavit of David Pettigrew_.

    This is to certify, that I, David Pettigrew, was a citizen of
    Jackson county, Missouri, and owned a good farm, lying on the Blue
    river, six miles west of Independence, and lived in peace with the
    inhabitants until the summer and fall of 1833, when the inhabitants
    began to {72} threaten us with destruction. I was at work in my
    field, and a man by the name of Allen, and others with him, came
    along and cried out, "Mr. Pettigrew, you are at work as though
    you were determined to stay here, but we are determined that you
    shall leave the county immediately." I replied that I was a free
    born citizen of the United States, and had done harm to no man.
    "I therefore claim protection by the law of the land," and that
    the law and the Constitution of the land would not suffer them to
    commit so horrid a crime. They then replied that "the old law and
    Constitution is worn out, and we are about to make a new one."

    I was at a meeting where we had met for prayer, and a man by the
    name of Masters came and desired an interview with us; he then
    stated that he was sent by the mob to inform us, that if we would
    forsake our "Mormon" and Prophet religion, and become of their
    religion, they, the mob, would be our brothers, and would fight for
    us; "but if you will not, we are ready and will drive you from the
    county."

    A few days after this, a large mob came to my house, commanded by
    General Moses Wilson, Hugh Braziel and Lewis Franklin, and broke
    down my door, and burst into my house, armed with guns, clubs and
    knives; some of them were painted red and black. This was in the
    night, and my family was much frightened. They threatened me with
    immediate death if I did not leave the place. After much abuse they
    left us for the night, but in a few days they returned and drove me
    and my family into the street, not suffering us to take anything
    with us. I saw that we must go or die; we went south to Van Buren
    county, in company with eighty or ninety others. In a short time
    after, I returned to my farm and found my house plundered, my grain
    and crop, stock, and all my farm and farming tools laid waste and
    destroyed; and shortly after my house was burned to ashes.

    I called on Esquire Western, of Independence, and inquired of
    him if he could inform me what all this mobbing and riot meant,
    informing him of the destruction and plundering of my house; to
    which he gave me no satisfaction, but insulted me and treated
    me roughly. Governor Boggs lived in the county, and I have seen
    him passing through among us in our great distress, and gave no
    attention to our distresses. He was then Lieutenant-Governor of the
    state. On my return to my family in Van Buren county, I was much
    abused by a man by the name of Brady; he said he would kill me if I
    ever attempted to go to my farm, or if he saw me passing that way
    again. I returned to my family, and in a few days after, a company
    of men came where we lived and said they would spill my blood if I
    did not leave the place immediately. The leaders of this company
    were John Cornet, Thomas Langley, and Hezekiah Warden; they lived
    in Jackson county.

    {73} This was in the cold winter, and our sufferings were great. I
    fled across the Missouri river to Clay county, where I lived three
    years; in which time I often heard Judge Cameron and others say,
    that "you Mormons cannot get your rights in any of the courts of
    the upper country;" and I had not the privilege of voting as a free
    citizen.

    I moved to Caldwell county, bought land and opened a good farm,
    and lived in peace until the summer and fall of 1838, when mobs
    arose in the counties round about, and I with the rest was obliged
    to take up arms in self defense; for the cry was, that mob law
    should prevail, if we stood against them, until the army came and
    took us all prisoners of war. I with the rest was obliged to sign
    a deed of trust at the point of the sword, I with sixty others was
    selected out and marched to Richmond, in Ray county, by the command
    of General Clark, where they kept us a number of weeks, pretending
    to try us as treasoners and murderers. At length I obtained my
    liberty, and returned to my family in Caldwell county: and I found
    that there was no safety there, for there was no law, but all a
    scene of robbing, and plundering, and stealing. They were about to
    take me again, and I was obliged to leave my family and flee to
    Illinois. In about two months my family arrived, having suffered
    much abuse and loss of health and property. Soon after the arrival
    of my family my son, a young man, died; and I attribute his death
    to the cruel barbarity of the mob of Missouri, he being a prisoner
    among them, and having suffered much because of them.

    My father was a soldier, and served in the Revolutionary War,
    under the great Washington, but I have not had protection on
    my own lands; and I have not been permitted to see my farm in
    Jackson county, Missouri, in seven years. Soldiers were stationed
    or quartered in different parts of Far West; and they treated us
    roughly, threatening to shoot us, and making use of anything they
    pleased, such as burning house, timber, and rails, and garden
    fences, and stealing and plundering what they pleased.

    When I was at Richmond, a prisoner before Judge King, we sent for
    many witnesses; and when they came, they were taken and cast into
    Prison with us, and we were not permitted to have any witnesses.
    The day I came out of prison, they compelled me to sign a writing
    which was not true or remain in prison.

    David Pettigrew.

    Sworn to before D. W. Kilbourn, J. P.

[Sidenote: Comment of the Prophet on the Foregoing Affidavits.]

Thus I have given a few of the multitude of affidavits which might
be given to substantiate the facts of our persecutions and deaths in
Missouri. When the brethren left Missouri, {74} they were poor, having
been plundered of everything valued by mobs. Much of the plundering
was done under the eye of the government officers, according to the
foregoing affidavits; and all by the sanction of the state of Missouri,
as the acts of her legislature testify. [5] The Saints, being so
numerous, were obliged to scatter over the state of Illinois and
different states to get bread and clothing--so that but few accounts
against Missouri could be collected without unreasonable exertions.
About 491 individuals gave in their claims against Missouri, which
I presented to Congress--amounting to about $1,381,044.00; leaving
a multitude more of similar bills hereafter to be presented, which,
if not settled immediately, will ere long amount to a handsome sum,
increasing by compound interest.

Footnotes:

1. This epistle is of interest as showing the spirit of the Church
government at that time, (1839) and the recognition of the rights of
individuals. For these reasons it is quoted here:

_To the Saints scattered abroad, in the region westward from Kirtland,
Ohio_:

Beloved Brethren:--Feeling that it is our duty, as the servants of God,
to instruct the Saints from time to time, in those things which to us
appear to be wise and proper--therefore we freely give you a few words
of advice at this time.

We have hear it rumored abroad, that some at least, and probably many,
are making their calculations to remove back to Kirtland next season.

Now brethren, this being the case, we advise you to abandon such an
idea; yea, we warn you, in the name of the Lord, not to remove back
there, unless you are counseled to do so by the First Presidency, and
the High Council of Nauvoo. We do not wish by this to take your agency
from you; but we feel to be plain, and pointed in our advice for we
wish to do our duty, that your sins may not be found in our skirts.
All persons are entitled to their agency, for God has so ordained
it. He has constituted mankind moral agents, and given them power to
choose good or evil; to seek after that which is good, by pursuing
the pathway of holiness in this life, which brings peace of mind, and
joy in the Holy Ghost here, and a fulness of joy and happiness at His
right hand hereafter; or to pursue an evil course, going on in sin and
rebellion against God, thereby bringing condemnation to their souls in
this world, and an eternal loss in the world to come. Since the God of
heaven has left these things optional with every individual, we do not
wish to deprive them of it. We only wish to act the part of a faithful
watchman, agreeably to the word of the Lord to Ezekiel the prophet,
(Ezekiel 33 chap. 2, 3, 4, 5, verses,) and leave it for others to do as
seemeth them good.

Now for persons to do things, merely because they are advised to do
them, and yet murmur all the time they are doing them, is of no use at
all; they might as well not do them. There are those who profess to be
Saints who are too apt to murmur, and find fault, when any advice is
given, which comes in opposition to their feelings, even when they,
themselves, ask for counsel; much more so when counsel is given unasked
for, which does not agree with their notion of things; but brethren, we
hope for better things from the most of you; we trust that you desire
counsel, from time to time, and that you will cheerfully conform to it,
whenever your receive it from a proper source.

It is very probable, that it may be considered wisdom for some of us,
[i. e. at Nauvoo], and perhaps others, to move back to Kirtland, to
attend to important business there: but notwithstanding that, after
what we have written, should any be so unwise to move back there,
without being first counseled so to do, their conduct will be highly
disapprobated.

Done by order and vote of the First Presidency and High Council for the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, at Nauvoo, December 8,
1839.

H.G. Sherwood, Clerk

_Times and Seasons_, Vol. 1, p. 29.

2. This communication of Hyrum Smith's adds nothing to his very
elaborate statement of the wrongs suffered by himself and the Saints
in Missouri already published in Volume III, pp. 403-424, except his
testimony to the truth of the Book of Mormon; and as he was one of the
Eight Witnesses to the fact of the existence of the Nephite plates
from which the record was translated, the paragraphs relating to that
testimony are give here:

"Having given my testimony to the world of the truth of the Book of
Mormon, the renewal of the everlasting covenant, and the establishment
of the kingdom of heaven, in the last days; and having been brought
into great afflictions and distresses for the same, I thought that it
might be strengthening to my beloved brethren, to give them a short
account of my sufferings, for the truth's sake, and the state of my
mind and feelings, while under circumstances of the most trying and
afflicting nature. * * * * I had been abused and thrust into a dungeon,
and confined for months on account of my faith, and the testimony of
Jesus Christ. However I thank God that I felt a determination to die,
rather than deny then things which my eyes have seen, which my hands
had handled, and which I had borne testimony to, [all in plain allusion
to his testimony to the existence of the plates from which the Book of
Mormon was translated] wherever my lot had been cast; and I can assure
my beloved brethren that I was enabled to bear as strong a testimony,
when nothing but death presented itself, as I ever did I my life. My
confidence in God, was likewise unshaken. I knew that He who suffered
me, along with my brethren, to be thus tried, that He could and that
He would deliver us out of the hands of our enemies; and in His own
due time He did so, for which I desire to bless and praise His holy
name."--_Times and Seasons_, Vol. 1, pp. 20 and 23.

3. This treatise on the "Regeneration and Eternal Duration of Matter,"
was written by Elder Pratt while in Columbia prison, Missouri. He
explains that it "was more calculated to comfort and console myself
and friends when death stared me in the face, than as an argumentative
or philosophical production." This article has for some time been out
of print, yet it has much that is instructive in it. The author states
as a basic principle in his treatise the following: "Matter and spirit
are the two great principles of all existence. Everything animate and
inanimate is composed of one or the other, or both of these eternal
principles. I say eternal, because the elements are as durable as the
quickening power which exists in them. Matter and spirit are of equal
duration; both are self-existent,--they never began to exist, and they
never can be annihilated. * * * * Matter as well as spirit is eternal,
uncreated, self existing. However infinite the variety of its changes,
forms and shapes;--however vast and varying the parts it has to act in
the great theater of the universe;--whatever sphere its several parts
may be destined to fill in the boundless organization of infinite
wisdom, yet it is there, durable at the throne of Jehovah. And eternity
is inscribed in indelible characters on every particle. Revolution may
succeed revolution;--vegetation may bloom and flourish, generation
upon generation may pass away and others still succeed--empires may
fall to ruin, and moulder to the dust and be forgotten--the marble
monuments of antiquity may crumble to atoms and mingle in the common
ruin--the mightiest works of art, with all their glory, may sink in
oblivion and be remembered no more--worlds may startle from their
orbits, and hurling from their spheres, run lawless on each other in
conceivable confusion--element may war with element in awful majesty,
while thunders roll from sky to sky, and arrows of lightning break the
mountains asunder--scatter the rocks like hailstones--set worlds on
fire, and melt the elements with fervent heat, and yet not one grain
can be lost--not one particle can be annihilated. All these revolutions
and convulsions of nature will only serve to refine, purify, and
finally restore and renew the elements upon which they act. And like
the sunshine after a storm, or like gold seven times tried in the fire,
they will shine forth with additional luster as they roll in their
eternal spheres, in their glory, in the midst of the power of God." On
this theory of the indestructibility of matter the author proceeds to
consider the reality of the resurrection from the dead and the future
life of man in a sentient, tangible existence. "The resurrection of
the body is a complete restoration and reorganization of the physical
system of man; * * * * the elements of which his body is composed
are eternal in their duration; * * * * they form the tabernacle--the
everlasting habitation of that spirit which animated them in this life;
* * * * the spirits and bodies of men are of equal importance and
destined to form an eternal and inseparable union with each other."

4. This affidavit, it will be observed, was given some time after the
others of this group, and appears in the Ms. of the Prophet's History
under date of March the 5th, but it is brought forward here, with all
those that follow in this chapter, that it may appear in connection
with the others of its kind.

5. That is to say, the legislature had appropriated two hundred
thousand dollars to meet the expenses of the mob-militia in unlawfully
dispossessing the Saints of their lands and other property, and then
expelling them from the state. While on the other hand, it refused
to give any consideration worthy of the name to the petition of the
Saints for redress of their grievances; and so far was the legislature
from giving the Saints any assurance of re-instatement in the rightful
possession of their lands and other property and maintaining them
in peaceful possession of them, that it finally refused even to
investigate the justice of their claims. Under these circumstances the
Prophet is undoubtedly justified in using the language of the text.
(See Vol. III, chaps. xv, xvi.)

{75}



CHAPTER IV.

Departure of the Prophet from Washington--Labors of Elias Higbee Before
the Senate Judiciary Committee--Report of the Committee.

_Wednesday, 8_.--The High Council at Nauvoo voted to loan all the
moneys possible for the relief of the poor Saints.

[Sidenote: Ministry of Brigham Young and Geo. A. Smith at Richmond, New
York.]

This evening President Young preached at a school house in the south
west part of Richmond, [1] when the people present commenced making
a noise and disturbing the meeting, and when President Young was
reproving them for their disgraceful conduct, some of those present
fired lucifer matches. President Young rebuked them severely, and
taught them better manners, and proposed to send them some Indians from
the West to civilize them.

_Thursday, 9_.--About this time I returned to Philadelphia, where I
continued to preach and visit for a little season.

George A. Smith preached at Richmond this evening. His health is still
very poor, and he is almost blind. President Young also was very
feeble. While they were opening the meeting, some one threw a quantity
of brimstone in the fire, which nearly suffocated them. As soon as the
fumes of brimstone would permit, Brother Smith told them he thought he
should be in no danger of catching the itch in Massachusetts, for the
smell of brimstone indicated that it was thoroughly cured.

_Sunday, 12_.--Elders Young and Smith held a meeting {76} at William
Pierson's, Richmond. After preaching, Elder Smith had a severe shake of
the ague, which lasted some hours. The weather was extremely cold, but
by the kind attention of Mr. Pierson's family, and William Richards,
he was in some measure relieved of his ague before he left Richmond.
President Young wore a cradle bed quilt from Far West to Richmond,
where Rhoda Richards lined Doctor Richard's old worn out plaid cloak
with President Young's quilt, with flannel between, which made him very
comfortable.

_Monday, 13_.--Elders Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, and Theodore
Turley arrived at Preston, England.

_Tuesday, 14_.--About this time Elder Rigdon and Doctor Foster arrived
at Philadelphia.

[Sidenote: Appointments in the British Mission.]

_Friday, 17_.--A special council was held at the house of Elder
Willard Richards, in Preston, Joseph Fielding, president, Theodore
Turley, scribe. Present, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, Hiram Clark,
and Willard Richards. Council decided that Elders Woodruff and Turley
should go to the Staffordshire potteries; Elders Taylor and Fielding,
to Liverpool; Elder Clark, to Manchester, with Elder William Clayton;
and Elder Willard Richards to go where the Spirit directs; that the
Elders of the council communicate with the presidency at Preston once a
month; and Elder Richards write to Brothers Alexander Wright and Samuel
Mulliner in Scotland, and hold no general conference until more of the
Twelve arrive.

Elders Brigham Young and George A. Smith went to Canaan, Connecticut,
with Edwin D. Pierson, Elder Smith shaking very severely with the ague
in the evening.

_Saturday, 18_.--Elders Woodruff and Turley started for the Potteries.

_Sunday 19_.--The High Council at Nauvoo voted to donate a city lot to
Brother James Hendrix, who was shot in Missouri; also voted to build
him a house; also donated a house and lot to Father Joseph Knight.

{77} Elder Brigham Young preached at Sheffield mills, where he stayed
till the twenty-sixth.

_Wednesday, 22_.--Elders Fielding and Taylor went to Liverpool and
commenced their mission.

_Saturday, 25_.--About this time I visited the Saints at Brandywine,
where I spent some days, and returned to Philadelphia.

_Monday, 27_.--Brothers Gibson Smith and Peter French conveyed Elders
Brigham Young and George A. Smith to New Haven, where they tarried
until the 31st.

About the last of this month, I left Philadelphia for Washington, in
company with Brothers Rockwell, Higbee, and Doctor Foster, traveling by
railroad, having sold my carriage, and having left Elder Rigdon sick in
Philadelphia.

_Friday, 31_.--Elders Brigham Young and George A. Smith took steamboat
from New Haven for New York City. When within eighteen miles of the
city, they took the stage, and arrived at their destination about ten
o'clock at night. When they alighted from the carriage they had no
funds to pay their fare, and Elder Young asked Captain Stone to pay
their bill, fifty cents, which he very readily did; and they found
Elder Parley P. Pratt's house in about five minutes, where they stayed
Saturday, February 1st.

_Sunday, February 2_.--Elders Brigham Young and George A. Smith
preached in the Columbia Hall. Elder Young preached every evening
during the week, till Saturday, three times in the Columbia Hall; by
which he injured himself so much, that he was not able to dress himself
for four or five days.

On Monday George A. Smith went to Philadelphia.

_Thursday, 6_.--I had previously preached in Washington, and one of my
sermons I find reported in synopsis, by a member of Congress; which I
will insert entire.

    {78} _Mathew S. Davis' Description of the Prophet, and a Report of
    his Washington Discourse_.

    Washington, 6th February, 1840.

    My Dear Mary:--I went last evening to hear "Joe Smith," the
    celebrated Mormon, expound his doctrine. I, with several others,
    had a desire to understand his tenets as explained by himself. He
    is not an educated man: but he is a plain, sensible, strong minded
    man. Everything he says, is said in a manner to leave an impression
    that he is sincere. There is no levity, no fanaticism, no want
    of dignity in his deportment. He is apparently from forty to
    forty-five years of age, rather above the middle stature, and what
    you ladies would call a very good looking man. In his garb there
    are no peculiarities; his dress being that of a plain, unpretending
    citizen. He is by profession a farmer, but is evidently well read.

    He commenced by saying, that he knew the prejudices which were
    abroad in the world against him, but requested us to pay no respect
    to the rumors which were in circulation respecting him or his
    doctrines. He was accompanied by three or four of his followers.
    He said, "I state to you our belief, so far as time will permit."
    "I believe," said he, "that there is a God, possessing all the
    attributes ascribed to Him by all Christians of all denominations;
    that He reigns over all things in heaven and on earth, and that
    all are subject to His power." He then spoke rationally of the
    attributes of Divinity, such as foreknowledge, mercy &c., &c. He
    then took up the Bible. "I believe," said he, "in this sacred
    volume. In it the 'Mormon' faith is to be found. We teach nothing
    but what the Bible teaches. We believe nothing, but what is to be
    found in this book. I believe in the fall of man, as recorded in
    the Bible; I believe that God foreknew everything, but did not
    foreordain everything; I deny that foreordain and foreknow is the
    same thing. He foreordained the fall of man; but all merciful as
    He is, He foreordained at the same time, a plan of redemption for
    all mankind. I believe in the Divinity of Jesus Christ, and that
    He died for the sins of all men, who in Adam had fallen." He then
    entered into some details, the result of which tended to show his
    total unbelief of what is termed _original sin_. He believes that
    it is washed away by the blood of Christ, and that it no longer
    exists. As a necessary consequence, he believes that we are all
    born pure and undefiled. That _all_ children dying at an early age
    (say _eight_ years) not knowing good from evil, were incapable of
    sinning; and that all such assuredly go to heaven. "I believe,"
    said he, "that a man is a moral, responsible, free agent; that
    although it was foreordained he should fall, and be redeemed, yet
    after the redemption it was not foreordained that he should again
    sin. In the Bible a rule of conduct is laid down for him; in the
    Old and {79} Testaments the law by which he is to be governed, may
    be found. If he violates that law, he is to be punished for the
    deeds done in the body."

    I believe that God is eternal. That He had no beginning, and can
    have no end. Eternity means that which is without beginning or
    end. I believe that the _soul_ is eternal; and had no beginning;
    it can have no end. Here he entered into some explanations, which
    were so brief that I could not perfectly comprehend him. But the
    idea seemed to be that the soul of man, the spirit, had existed
    from eternity in the bosom of Divinity; and so far as he was
    intelligible to me, must ultimately return from whence it came. He
    said very little of rewards and punishments; but one conclusion,
    from what he did say, was irresistible--he contended throughout,
    that everything which had a _beginning_ must have an _ending_;
    and consequently if the punishment of man _commenced_ in the next
    world, it must, according to his logic and belief have an _end_.

    During the whole of his address, and it occupied more than two
    hours, there was no opinion or belief that he expressed, that
    was calculated, in the slightest degree, to impair the morals
    of society, or in any manner to degrade and brutalize the human
    species. There was much in his precepts, if they were followed,
    that would soften the asperities of man towards man, and that
    would tend to make him a more rational being than he is generally
    found to be. There was no violence, no fury, no denunciation. His
    religion appears to be the religion of meekness, lowliness, and
    mild persuasion.

    Towards the close of his address, he remarked that he had been
    represented as pretending to be a Savior, a worker of miracles,
    etc. All this was false. He made no such pretensions. He was but a
    man, he said; a plain, untutored man; seeking what he should do to
    be saved. He performed no miracles. He did not pretend to possess
    any such power. He closed by referring to the Mormon Bible, which
    he said, contained nothing inconsistent or conflicting with the
    Christian Bible, and he again repeated that all who would follow
    the precepts of the Bible, whether Mormon or not, would assuredly
    be saved.

    Throughout his whole address, he displayed strongly a spirit
    of charity and forbearance. The Mormon Bible, he said, was
    communicated to him, _direct from heaven_. If there was such a
    thing on earth, as the author of it, then he (Smith) was the
    author; but the idea that he wished to impress was, that he had
    penned it as dictated by God.

    I have taken some pains to explain this man's belief, as he
    himself explained it. I have done so because it might satisfy
    your curiosity, and might be interesting to you, and some of your
    friends. _I have changed my opinion of the Mormons_. They are an
    injured and much-abused people. Of matters of _faith_, you know
    I express no opinion. I have {80} only room to add--let William,
    if you cannot do it, acknowledge the receipt of this, with the
    enclosure.

    Remember me to Sarah and the boys. Kiss the dear baby for me.

    Affectionately your husband,

    M. L. Davis.

    P. S.--I omitted to say, he does not believe in infant baptism,
    _sprinkling_, but in _immersion_, after _eight_ years of age.

    To Mrs. Mathew L. Davis, 107 Henry Street, New York.

[Sidenote: The Prophet's Interview with Van Buren and Calhoun.]

During my stay I had an interview with Martin Van Buren, the President,
who treated me very insolently, and it was with great reluctance
he listened to our message, which, when he had heard, he said:
"_Gentlemen, your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you_;"
and "_If I take up for you I shall lose the vote of Missouri_."
His whole course went to show that he was an office-seeker, that
self-aggrandizement was his ruling passion, and that justice and
righteousness were no part of his composition. I found him such a
man as I could not conscientiously support at the head of our noble
Republic. I also had an interview with Mr. John C. Calhoun, whose
conduct towards me very ill became his station. I became satisfied
there was little use for me to tarry, to press the just claims of the
Saints on the consideration of the President or Congress, and stayed
but a few days, taking passage in company with Porter Rockwell and Dr.
Foster on the railroad and stages back to Dayton, Ohio.

_Friday, 7_.--High Council at Montrose voted to disfellowship all
brethren who should persist in keeping tippling shops in that branch of
the Church.

_Sunday, 16_.--Elder Brigham Young tarried at Elder Parley P. Pratt's,
58 Mott Street, N. Y., and Elder Heber C. Kimball arrived there this
morning.

_Thursday, 20_.--Judge Higbee I left at Washington, and he wrote me as
follows:

 {81} _Elias Higbee's Letter to the Prophet, Reporting Progress of the
 Cause of the Saints Before the Senate Committee_.

 Washington City, Feb. 20th, 1840.

 Dear Brother:--I have just returned from the Committee Room, wherein
 I spoke about one hour and a half. There were but three of the
 committee present, for which I am very sorry. I think they will be
 obliged to acknowledge the justice of our cause. They paid good
 attention; and I think my remarks were well received. It was a special
 meeting appointed to hear me by my request. The Missouri Senators and
 Representatives were invited to attend. Dr. Linn, and Mr. Jamieson
 attended, and God gave me courage, so that I was not intimidated
 by them. Dr. Linn, I thought, felt a little uneasy at times; but
 manifested a much better spirit afterwards than Mr. Jamieson.

 I told them first, that I represented a suffering people, who had
 been deprived, together with myself, of their rights in Missouri; who
 numbered something like fifteen thousand souls; and not only they,
 but many others were deprived of the rights guaranteed to them by the
 Constitution of the United States. At least the amount of one hundred
 and fifty thousand free-born citizens are deprived the enjoyment of
 citizenship in each and every state; that we had no ingress in the
 state of Missouri; nor could any of us have, only at the expense of
 our lives; and this by the order of the executive.

 I then took their own declaration of the cause of our expulsion;
 referred them to Parley P. Pratt's pamphlet, which I held in my hand;
 then showed that the first accusation therein contained, was on
 account of our religious tenets; furthermore, that the others were
 utterly groundless. I went on to prove that the whole persecution,
 from beginning to end, was grounded on our religious faith. For
 evidence of this, I referred them to Porter Rockwell's testimony, and
 P. Powell's. I stated that there was abundant testimony to prove this
 to be a fact, among the documents.

 I then gave a brief history of the persecutions, from the first
 settlement in the state to our final expulsion. I also stated that
 the society were industrious, inoffensive, and innocent of crime; had
 the _Times and Seasons_, from which I read Governor Lucas's letter
 to Alanson Ripley. I also referred to Judge Young's letter from Pike
 county, the clerk's and others, respecting our character in their
 section of the country. I gave them some hints of the Haun's mill
 massacre, and the murder of the two little boys, but referred them
 more particularly to the documents for information concerning those
 things; and furthermore that I had not come here to instruct them
 in what they were to do in the case, but to present them with the
 facts--having all confidence in this honorable body (the Congress),
 believing them to be honorable men.

 {82} I demanded from them a restitution of all our rights and
 privileges as citizens of the United States, and damages for all
 the losses we had sustained in consequence of our persecutions and
 expulsion from the state; and told them we could have recourse no
 where else on earth that I knew of; that we could not sue an army of
 soldiers, neither could we go into the state to sue anyone else. I
 told them that I knew not how far Congress had jurisdiction in this
 case, or how far they had not; but as far as they had, we claimed the
 exercise of it for our relief; for we were an injured people.

 These and some others were the principal subjects of my speech; after
 which Mr. Jamieson said he was once in the "Mormons'" favor; but
 afterwards learned that it was impossible to live among them, for
 they stole their neighbors' hogs; and there being so much testimony,
 he believed it, etc., etc. I replied something like this: making
 statements was one thing, and proving them was another. Mr. Linn then
 said he wished me to answer one thing, viz.: If the legislature of
 Missouri did not refuse to investigate the subject of our difficulties
 solely on account of the trials then pending. In reply I assured him
 that I knew they had refused us an investigation; but as to that being
 the cause, I did not know, but told him they might have done it when
 those trials were discharged. He seemed to think it an injustice for
 Congress to take it up before the legislature had acted on it.

 I occupied all but a few minutes of the time when the Senate was to go
 into session, so they adjourned until tomorrow at ten o'clock, when
 the Missourians are to reply. Mr. Linn observed, that there was a
 gentleman whom he would have before the committee on the morrow, who
 lived in the upper part of Missouri, that knew everything relative
 to the affair. I presume _he_ is to put in his gab. I suppose I
 must attend the committee, as I am solicited by the chairman; but I
 would rather take a flogging; because I must sit still, and hear a
 volubility of lies concerning myself and brethren. _Lies_ I say, for
 they have nothing but _lies_ to tell, that will in the least degree
 justify their conduct in Missouri. Mr. Linn said he had written
 to Missouri, to get all the evidence taken before Judge King; so
 that if the thing must come up, he would be prepared to have a full
 investigation of the matter, and that the committee should have power
 to send for persons, papers, &c,. &c.

 In my remarks I stated that an article of the Constitution was
 violated in not granting compulsory process for witnesses in behalf
 of the prisoners; and that the main evidence adduced, upon which
 they were committed, (as I understood), was from Dr. Avard, who once
 belonged to our society, and was compelled to swear as suited them
 best, in order to save his life; that I knew him to be a man whose
 character was the {83} worst I ever knew in all my associations or
 intercourse with mankind; and that I had evidence by affidavits before
 them, of five or six respectable men, to prove that all he swore to
 was false.

 Brethren and sisters, I want your especial prayers, that God may give
 me wisdom to manage this case according to His will, and that He will
 protect me from our foes, both publicly and privately.

 Yours in the bonds of love,

 Elias Higbee.

 _Second letter of Elias Higbee to the Prophet--Cause of the Saints
 before the Senate Committee_.

 Washington City, February 21st, 1840.

 Dear Brother.--I have just returned again from the Committee Room.
 Mr. Linn and Mr. Jamieson made some remarks, to which I replied. Mr.
 Linn is much more mild and reasonable (mostly perhaps from policy)
 than Mr. Jamieson, who related a long lingo of stuff, which he said
 was proven before the legislature in Missouri, which amounted to about
 this: that Joseph Smith gave the "Mormons" liberty to trespass on
 their neighbors' property; also told them, that it all belonged to
 them; as they were Israelites. Upon the strength of this they became
 the aggressors. I replied that the Jackson county people in their
 declaration of causes that induced them to unite in order to drive the
 "Mormons," the crime of stealing, or trespassing, was not mentioned;
 and there was no docket, either clerk's or justice's, that could show
 it, in Jackson, Clay, Caldwell, or in Daviess counties; and that no
 man ever heard such teaching or doctrine from Joseph Smith, or any
 other "Mormon;" that we held to no such doctrine, neither believed in
 any such thing.

 I mentioned some things contained in our Book of Doctrine and
 Covenants; Government and Laws in general. I told them we had
 published long ago our belief on that subject. Some things I
 recollected, which were that all persons should obey the laws of the
 government under which they lived, and that ecclesiastical power
 should not be exercised to control our civil rights in any way;
 particularly that ecclesiastical power should only be used in the
 Church; and then no further than fellowship was concerned. I think
 they injured their cause to-day. There is another appointment for
 them on the morrow, at 10 o'clock. Their friend they said was sick,
 consequently could not attend to-day. Mr. Linn said he thought it
 would be time enough to take it up in Congress when they [the Saints]
 could not get justice from the State; and that he was confident there
 was a disposition in the state of Missouri to do us justice, should
 we apply; that the reason of their refusing to investigate before
 was, the trials of the prisoners were pending; and further said,
 (when speaking of the trials before Judge King,) that he understood
 from {84} gentlemen that the prisoners commended the Judge for his
 clemency and fair dealing towards them; and acknowledged they were
 guilty in part of the charge preferred against them. Mr. Linn said he
 presumed I was not present, when said men were tried. I replied in the
 negative, that I was not there, neither any body else that could be a
 witness in their favor. The lawyers advised them to keep away if they
 desired the salvation of their lives. I observed that I had read the
 proceedings of the legislature, but did not now recollect them; but
 since yesterday I have been reflecting on the subject, and recollect a
 conversation I had with Mr. Harvey Redfield, who was the bearer of the
 petition to Jefferson City, and he informed me that the reasons why
 they refused an investigation, was on account of the Upper Missouri
 members being so violently opposed to it, that they used their utmost
 exertions, and finally succeeded in getting a majority against it; and
 the reason of their taking this course was, in consequence of one of
 their members being in the massacre at Haun's mill, viz., Mr. Ashley;
 and Cornelius Gilliam was a leader of the first mob in Daviess county,
 which the militia were called out to suppress.

 Mr. Linn said if it must come out in Congress, it should be fully
 investigated, and they, the Committee, should have power to send for
 persons and papers; for if we have a right to claim damages of the
 United States, so had they, if all were true concerning the acts
 alleged against the "Mormons;" that they had a right to ask the
 Government to pay the war against the "Mormons;" but finally seemed
 to disapprove of the exterminating order, which was admitted to have
 existed by Mr. Jamieson, or was issued by their legislature, but that
 no one ever thought of carrying it into effect. He said that General
 Clark merely advised the "Mormons" to leave the State. To which I
 replied, General Clark's speech was before them; that I had stated
 some of its contents yesterday; and if it were necessary, I could
 prove it by four or five hundred affidavits.

 Then Mr. Jamieson stated something about the prisoners making their
 escape, and that he had no doubt but that they could have a fair trial
 in Missouri, for the legislature, to his certain knowledge, passed
 a law whereby they had a right to choose any county in the State to
 be tried in. To which I replied, that I understood such a law was
 passed; but notwithstanding, they could not get their trials in the
 county wherein they desired; for they were forced to go to Boone,
 whereas they desired to have their trials in Palmyra, where they
 could get their witnesses, as that was only sixteen miles from the
 river, and the other was a great distance. He said that Judge King
 certainly would not go contrary to law. I told him there were some
 affidavits in those documents that would tell him some things very
 strange concerning Judge {85} King. Mr. Linn then wished to know if
 the affidavits were from anybody else save "Mormons." I replied that
 there were some others; but how many I knew not. He then wanted to
 know how they were certified; whether any clerk's name was attached in
 the business. I told him they were well authenticated by the Courts of
 Record, with the Clerk's name attached thereto.

 After these things and some others were said, the committee refused
 to consult on the subject. Only the same three attended that were
 in yesterday. The Chairman observed that they had not expressed any
 opinion relative to the subject; but observed his mind was made up in
 relation to the matter. I think, from all I have discovered, Mr. Smith
 of Indiana will be on the side of justice; but how the thing will
 terminate I cannot tell. Mr. Crittenden and Mr. Strange are the two
 absent members of the Committee.

 Yours in the bond of love,

 Elias Higbee.

 _Third Letter of Elias Higbee to the Prophet--Cause of the Saints
 before the Senate Committee_.

 Washington, February 22nd, 1840.

 Dear Brother.--I have just returned from the Committee Room. The
 Committee being present to-day, a Mr. Corwin of St. Louis, formerly a
 democratic editor, emptied his budget; which was as great a bundle of
 nonsense and stuff as could be thought of; I suppose not what he knew,
 but what gentlemen had told him; for instance, the religious General
 Clark and others. I confess I had hard work to restrain my feeling
 some of the time, but I did succeed in keeping silence tolerably well.
 Himself, Mr. Jamieson, and Mr. Linn summoned all the energies of their
 minds to impress upon the assembly that "Joe Smith," as he called him,
 led the people altogether by Revelation, in their temporal, civil,
 and political matters, and by this means caused all the "Mormons"
 to vote the "whole-hog" ticket on one side, except two persons. But
 when I got an opportunity of speaking, I observed that Joseph Smith
 never led any of the Church in these matters; as we considered him
 to have no authority, neither did he presume to exercise any of that
 nature; that Revelations were only concerning spiritual things in the
 Church; and the Bible being our standard, we received no Revelations
 contrary to it. I also observed that we were not such ignoramuses,
 perhaps, as he fain would have people believe us to be; and some other
 things on this subject. I then told him that every man exercised the
 right of suffrage according to his better judgment, and without any
 ecclesiastical restraint being put upon him; that it was all false
 about a Revelation on voting; and the reason of our voting that ticket
 was in consequence of {86} the Democratic principles having been
 taught us from our infancy, and that they ever extended equal rights
 to all; and further we had been much persecuted previous to that
 time--many threatenings being made from the counties round about, as
 well as among us, by those who took the lead in political affairs. It
 was true we advised our brethren to vote this ticket, telling them we
 thought that party would protect our rights, and not suffer us to be
 driven from our lands, as we had hitherto been; believing it to be
 by far the most liberal party; but in that we were mistaken, because
 when it came to the test, there were as many Democrats turned against
 us as Whigs; and indeed less liberality and political freedom were
 manifested by them; for one Whig paper came out decidedly in our favor.

 I made these remarks partly from motives which I may at another time
 explain to you. He laid great stress on the trials at Richmond, and a
 constitution, that he said Avard and others (who were in good standing
 in the "Mormon" Church at this time) swore to; then went on to relate
 what it contained, and that it was written by Sidney Rigdon.

 I flatly denied it, and I could bring all the "Mormons," both men,
 women, and children, besides myself, that would swear before all the
 world, that no such thing ever existed, nor was thought of among the
 "Mormons."

 He then related some things which he said John Corril had told him
 at the legislature, in Missouri; which were to the effect that the
 "Mormons" had burnt a number of houses in Daviess county, and that
 for himself, if he could not get to heaven by being an honest man, he
 would never go there. Then, I, speaking of some of the dissenters,
 told him Corril was anxious to get into the Church again, and that it
 was the fact in regard to damages having been done, after we had been
 driven from Jackson and Clay--relating the De Witt scrape, and calling
 of the militia, and the mob's marching to Daviess and saying they
 would drive the "Mormons" from there to Caldwell, and then to hell;
 their burning our houses: that small parties on both sides were on
 the alert, and probably did some damages; though I was not personally
 knowing to [it], as I was not there. I told him Joseph Smith held no
 office in the country, neither was he a military man, and did not take
 gun in hand in the affair to my knowledge. I then stated that John
 Corril's affidavit, which contained some important facts, was before
 them,--which facts I forgot to mention yesterday,--importing that he
 (John Corril) was convinced we would get no redress in Missouri (he
 being a member of the legislature, ought to know). I saw the Chairman
 of the Committee not long since, who informed me that the Committee
 had not come to a final conclusion on this matter as yet.

 I saw Mr. Jamieson on the walk, who said the first thing the {87}
 Committee would do was to decide whether they would take it up and
 consider it or not; and if they do take it up according to request,
 the Senate will grant the Committee power to send for persons and
 papers. The Committee made some inquiries respecting our religion, and
 I answered there, as a matter of course, as well as I was able.

 They inquired very particularly concerning how much land we had
 entered there, and how much of it yet remained unsold; when Mr.
 Corwin observed that we had never entered much land there, but were
 squatters. I then described the size of Caldwell and Daviess counties,
 giving an explanation on these matters.

 I suppose perhaps on Monday or Tuesday, we shall know something
 relative to this matter. Whether power be given them to send for
 persons and papers, [or not] you may see where they depend to rally
 their forces, viz., by endeavoring to make us treasonable characters,
 by the constitution, said to govern us, and that everything both civil
 and political among us is done by revelation. These points I desire
 to blow to the four winds, and that you will select a number of firm
 brethren, possessing good understanding, who will tell the truth, and
 willingly send me their names when they know they are wanted. Send
 plenty of them. They will get two dollars per day, and ten cents a
 mile to and from, [as] expense money. Do not send them until their
 subpoenas get there, for they will not draw expense money only for
 going home.

 I will suggest a few names--Alanson Ripley, King Follett, Amasa Lyman,
 Francis M. Higbee, as they know concerning the De Witt scrape; also
 send Charles C. Rich, Seymour Brunson, and others. You will know whom
 to send better than myself.

 If the Missourians should send for you, I would say consult God about
 going.

 Elias Higbee.

 P. S.--Mr. Jamieson stated to me this evening, if the "Mormons" could
 make it appear that they had been wronged, they would use their
 influence in having them redressed, so the shame should not fall on
 the whole state, but on those which had been guilty. I then observed
 that there was a minority in the legislature, much in our favor, which
 seemed to please him, as they alluded several times to it. The cause
 of my being so particular, is to show you the whole ground I have
 taken in this matter, that there may be no inconsistency. If I have
 erred in this matter, it is my head and not my heart.

 Elias Higbee.

_Sunday, 23_.--Elder Brigham Young had so far recovered as to be able
to attend preaching by Parley P. Pratt, at Columbia Hall, New York.

{88} The High Council of Nauvoo voted, that the notes given into the
hands of Bishop Partridge, by certain individuals, as consecrations for
building the Lord's House in Far West, be returned to the same by him.

_Tuesday, 25_.--Elders Brigham Young and Reuben Hedlock went
to Hampstead, on Long Island, and preached at Rockaway and the
neighborhood till the fourth of March, and baptized nine.

    _The Fourth Letter of Elias Higbee to the Prophet--Announces that
    the Senate Committee's Report will be Adverse to the Saints_.

    Washington, February 26th, 1840.

    Dear Brother.--I am just informed, by General Wall (the Chairman of
    the Committee), before whom, or to whom, our business is referred,
    that the decision is against us, or in other words unfavorable,
    that they believe redress can only be had in Missouri, the courts
    and legislature. He says, they will report this week. I desire to
    get a copy of it, and also the papers. I feel a conscience void of
    offense towards God and man in this matter; that I have discharged
    my duty here; and as I wish not to be on expense, as soon as I can
    write to President Rigdon, get my papers, and draw some money to
    bear my expenses, I shall bid adieu to this city, to return to my
    family and friends.

    I feel now that we have made our last appeal to all earthly
    tribunals; that we should now put our whole trust in the God of
    Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. We have a right now which we could not
    heretofore so fully claim--that is, of asking God for redress and
    redemption, as they have been refused us by man.

    Elias Higbee.

    To Joseph Smith, Junior.

[Sidenote: The Prophet _en route_ for Nauvoo.]

When I had returned as far as Dayton, Ohio, I found the horses which we
left on our journey out, and from thence I pursued my journey through
Indiana on horseback, in company with Dr. Foster, leaving Brother
Porter Rockwell at Dayton; the traveling being exceedingly bad, my
progress was slow and wearisome.

[Sidenote: Death of James Mulholland.]

My clerk, James Mulholland, while I was absent, died {89} on November
3rd, 1839, aged thirty-five years. He was a man of fine education, and
a faithful scribe and Elder in the Church. [2]

_Wednesday, March 4, 1840_. I arrived safely at Nauvoo, after a
wearisome journey, through alternate snow and mud, having witnessed
many vexatious movements in government officers, whose sole object
should be the peace and prosperity and happiness of the whole people;
but instead of this, I discovered that popular clamor and personal
aggrandizement were the ruling principles of those in authority; and
my heart faints within me when I see, by the visions of the Almighty,
the end of this nation, if she continues to disregard the cries and
petitions of her virtuous citizens, as she has done, and is now doing.

I have also enjoyed many precious moments with the Saints during my
journey.

On my way home I did not fail to proclaim the iniquity and insolence of
Martin Van Buren, toward myself and an injured people, which will have
its effect upon the public mind; and may he never be elected again to
any office of trust or power, [3] by which he may abuse the innocent
and let the guilty go free.

I depended on Dr. Foster to keep my daily journal during this journey,
but he has failed me.

Elders Brigham Young and Reuben Hedlock returned to New York, and held
a conference, when many Elders were ordained.

    {90} _Report of the Senate Judiciary Committee on the Case of the
    Saints vs. Missouri_.

    Twenty-sixth Congress--First Session.--In the Senate of the United
    States, March 4th, 1840. Submitted, laid on the table, and ordered
    to be printed, the following Report, made by Mr. Wall--

    The Committee on the Judiciary to whom was referred the Memorial of
    a Delegation of the Latter-day Saints, report--

    The Petition of the Memoralists sets forth, in substance, that
    a portion of their sect commenced a settlement in the county of
    Jackson, in the state of Missouri, in the summer of 1831; that
    they bought lands, built houses, erected churches, and established
    their homes, and engaged in all the various occupations of life;
    that they were expelled from that county in 1833 by a mob, under
    circumstances of great outrage, cruelty, and oppression, and
    against all law, and without any offense committed on their part,
    and to the destruction of property to the amount of 120,000
    dollars; that the society thus expelled amounted to about 1,200
    souls; that no compensation was ever made for the destruction of
    their property in Jackson; that after their expulsion from Jackson
    county, they settled in Clay county, on the opposite side of the
    Missouri river, where they purchased lands, and entered others at
    the land office; where they resided peaceably for three years,
    engaged in cultivation, and other useful and active employments,
    when the mob again threatened their peace, lives, and property; and
    they became alarmed, and finally made a treaty with the citizens
    of Clay county, that they should purchase their lands, and the
    Saints should remove; which was complied with on their part, and
    the Saints removed to the county of Caldwell, where they took up
    their abode and re-established their settlement, not without heavy
    pecuniary losses and other inconveniences; that the citizens of
    Clay county never paid them for their lands, except for a small
    part; they remained in Caldwell from 1836 until the fall of 1838,
    and during that time had acquired, by purchase from the Government,
    the settlers, and pre-emptioners, almost all the lands in the
    county of Caldwell, and a portion of the lands in Daviess and
    Carroll counties--the former county being almost entirely settled
    by the Saints, and they were rapidly filling up the two latter
    counties.

    Those counties, when the Saints first commenced their settlement,
    were for the most part wild and uncultivated, and they had
    converted them into large and well improved farms, well stocked.
    Land had risen in value to ten or even twenty-five dollars per
    acre, and these counties were rapidly advancing in cultivation and
    wealth.

    That in August, 1838, a riot commenced, growing out of an attempt
    of a Saint to vote, which resulted in creating great excitement,
    and the {91} perpetration of many scenes of lawless outrage, which
    are set forth in the Petition. That they were finally compelled to
    fly from those counties, and on the 11th October, 1838, they sought
    safety by that means, with their families, leaving many of their
    effects behind. That they had previously applied to the constituted
    authorities of Missouri for protection, but in vain. They allege,
    that they were pursued by the mob; that conflicts ensued; deaths
    occurred on each side; and finally a force was organized under the
    authority of the Governor of the state of Missouri, with orders to
    drive the Saints from the state, or exterminate them. The Saints
    thereupon determined to make no further resistance, but to submit
    themselves to the authorities of the state.

    Several of the Saints were arrested and imprisoned on a charge of
    treason against the state, and the rest, amounting to about 15,000
    souls, fled into other states, principally into Illinois, where
    they now reside.

    The petition is drawn up at great length, and sets forth, with
    feeling and eloquence, the wrongs of which they complain; justifies
    their own conduct, and aggravates that of those whom they call
    their persecutors, and concludes by saying they see no redress,
    unless it be obtained of the Congress of the United States, to
    whom they make their solemn, last appeal, as American citizens, as
    Christians, and as men; to which decision they say they will submit.

    The committee have examined the case presented by the petition, and
    heard the views urged by their agent, with care and attention; and
    after full examination and consideration, unanimously concur in the
    opinion--

    That the case presented for their investigation is not such a one
    as will justify or authorize any interposition by this government.

    The wrongs complained of are not alleged to be committed by any of
    the officers of the United States, or under the authority of its
    government in any manner whatever. The allegations in the petition
    relate to the acts of its citizens, and inhabitants and authorities
    of the state of Missouri, of which state the petitioners were at
    the time citizens, or inhabitants.

    The grievances complained of in the petition are alleged to
    have been done within the territory of the state of Missouri.
    The committee, under these circumstances, have not considered
    themselves justified in inquiring into the truth or falsehood
    of the facts charged in the petition. If they are true, the
    petitioners must seek relief in the courts of judicature of
    the state of Missouri, or of the United States, which has the
    appropriate jurisdiction to administer full and adequate redress
    for the wrongs complained of, and doubless will do so fairly and
    impartially; [4] {92} or the petitioners may, if they see proper,
    apply to the justice and magnanimity of the state of Missouri--an
    appeal which the committee feel justified in believing will never
    be made in vain by the injured or oppressed.

    It can never be presumed that a state either wants the power or
    lacks the disposition to redress the wrongs of its own citizens,
    committed within her own territory, whether they proceed from the
    lawless acts of her officers or any other persons. The committee
    therefore report that they recommend the passage of the following
    resolution:

    _Resolved_, That the committee on the judiciary be discharged from
    the further consideration of the memorial in this case; and that
    the memorialists have leave to withdraw the papers which accompany
    their memorial.

Footnotes:

1. Richmond is in Schoharie county, about seventy miles west of Albany,
N. Y.

2. Mulholland street in Nauvoo was named in honor of this worthy man.
It ran east and west on the south side of the Temple block, and became
the principal business street of the city. It was to him that the
Prophet dictated a considerable part of his history. See History of the
Church, Vol. III, p. 375.

3. He never was. In the Presidential election of 1840, Van Buren was
renominated by the Democratic Party, but was defeated by William
Henry Harrison, the Whig candidate. Harrison received two hundred and
thirty-four electoral votes to sixty for Van Buren. In 1848 Van Buren
was again a candidate for President being the nominee of the Free Soil
Party. Lewis Cass was the nominee of the Democrats, and Zachary Taylor
of the Whigs. Taylor was elected, and Van Buren did not receive a
single electoral vote.

4. The Saints never acted upon the suggestion of the judiciary
committee of the Senate, that they take their case before the Federal
courts. The reasons why are considered at length in the introduction of
this volume which see.

{93}



CHAPTER V.

Affairs of the Saints before United States Senate--General Conference
of the Church at Nauvoo--Action of the Church with Reference to Senate
Committee's Report--Mission to Palestine.

_Friday, 6_.--Attended the meeting of the High Council of Iowa, at
Brother Elijah Fordham's, Montrose.

    _Extract from the Minutes of the Iowa High Council_.

    President Joseph Smith, Jun., addressed the Council on various
    subjects, and in particular the consecration law; stating that
    the affairs now before Congress was the only thing that ought
    to interest the Saints at present; and till it was ascertained
    how it would terminate, no person ought to be brought to account
    before the constituted authorities of the Church for any offense
    whatever; and [he] was determined that no man should be brought
    before the Council in Nauvoo till that time, etc., etc. The law
    of consecration could not be kept here, and that it was the will
    of the Lord that we should desist from trying to keep it; and if
    persisted in, it would produce a perfect defeat of its object, and
    that he assumed the whole responsibility of not keeping it until
    proposed by himself. [1]

    {94} He requested every exertion to be made to forward affidavits
    to Washington, and also letters to members of Congress. The
    following votes were then passed:

    First--That this Council will coincide with President Joseph Smith,
    Jun.'s decision concerning the consecration law, on the principle
    of its being the will of the Lord, and of President Smith's taking
    the responsibility on himself.

    Second--That a committee of three be appointed, consisting of
    Wheeler Baldwin, Lyman Wight, and Abraham O. Smoot, to obtain
    affidavits and other documents to be forwarded to the city of
    Washington.

    Third--That the clerk of this Council be directed to inform Judge
    Higbee, that it is the wish of this Council that he should not,
    upon any consideration, consent to accept of anything of Congress
    short of our just rights and demands for our losses and damages in
    Missouri.

_Sunday, 8_.--I attended the Council of Nauvoo, at Brother Granger's.

President Brigham Young preached in Columbia Hall, New York.

_Monday, 9_.--Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt,
Orson Pratt, George A. Smith, and Reuben Hedlock, sailed from New York
on the _Patrick Henry_ for Liverpool.

    _Fifth Letter of Elias Higbee to the Prophet--the Affairs of the
    Saints at Washington_.

    Washington, March 9th, 1840.

    Dear Brother:--I expected, by this time, that we would be through
    with our business, but the chairman of the committee gave notice
    last week, he should call it [the committee's Report] up today
    in the Senate; through Mr. Young's having gone to Philadelphia,
    it will not be called up until his return, which will be on next
    Thursday, according to the information that I have obtained
    relative to this matter. If the resolution is passed, as annexed to
    the Report, I shall get my papers and leave the city.

    I have written some letters to Brother Rigdon, which it seems he
    did not get. Brother Samuel Bennett writes that Brother Rigdon left
    Philadelphia for the Jerseys on the 5th instant. He [Rigdon] stated
    that he expects me to come there to go with him home, and that he
    would write me soon on the subject. I shall write for him to make
    the necessary arrangements. He says Dr. Ell's family left about a
    week ago for Commerce. Also that the Church there numbers about one
    hundred; and Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Brother Kimball, Brother
    Brigham {95} Young, George A. Smith, and Brother Hedlock were to
    sail from New York to England on the 7th instant.

    As I have lately written several letters to you, I shall bid adieu,
    not to write again until after the Senate acts upon our business.
    Mr. Robinson says he has sent you a report; notwithstanding, I
    shall enclose another for you.

    I have changed my place of boarding in consequence of Mrs. Richey's
    breaking up house-keeping, and going to Baltimore. I am busy here
    at chimney corner preaching.

    Yours as ever in the bonds of everlasting love,

    Elias Higbee.

    To President Joseph Smith, Jun., Commerce, Illinois.

    P. S.--Lest my previous letters should not come to hand, I merely
    say that I have been before the committee three days, and done all
    in my power to effect the object of our mission; have spoken my
    mind freely on the subject; and feel to have a conscience void of
    offense towards God in this matter. The subscription of which the
    report makes mention, was on condition that they could not lawfully
    do anything for us; after examination we were to submit and wait
    until the Great Disposer of human events shall adjust these things,
    in that place where the wicked cease from troubling and the weary
    are at rest (this I think is nearly the sentiment though perhaps
    not the very words); and I for one hope and pray the time will
    soon come when they will not trouble us in the west, as they have
    hitherto done.

    There is a man here on whom I occasionally call, who owns two
    printing presses and much type, reading our books, I will with the
    assistance of God, get him to come to the west as soon as possible
    with his press, that you may set him to printing the truth. He told
    me, if we had any printing to do, he would do it cheap, and even go
    to the west if necessary.

    Give my respects to Porter Rockwell, Dr. Foster, and also all the
    household of faith.

    E. H.

_Friday, 13_.--Jacob K. Potts and Levi Stilley made affidavit before
William Oglesby, J. P., that they witnessed the massacre at Haun's mill
on the 30th of October, 1838, confirming the statements already written
in this History. Potts had two balls shot into his right leg.

_Sunday, 15_.--The High Council of the Church at Nauvoo voted that the
First Presidency superintend the affairs of the ferry between Nauvoo
and Montrose.

{96} _Monday, 16_.--Elder John Taylor wrote from Liverpool:

    _Extract from Elder John Taylor's Letter--Affairs in British
    Mission_.

    I told you about our coming to Liverpool. The first time I preached
    ten came forward [for baptism]. We have been baptizing since: last
    week we baptized nine, we are to baptize tomorrow, but how many I
    know not. The little stone is rolling forth. One of the brethren
    dreamed he saw two men come to Liverpool; they cast a net into the
    sea and pulled it out full of fishes: he was surprised to see them
    pick the small fish out first and then the large. Well, if we get
    all the fish I shall be satisfied.

    Brother Woodruff has lately left the Potteries and has gone to
    another neighborhood, and is making Methodist preachers scarce.
    He baptized 32 persons in one week--13 of them were Methodist
    preachers. Elder Clark is preaching and baptizing in and about
    Manchester. The latest account from Elder Turley, he was well,
    preaching and baptizing in the Potteries. Elder Willard Richards
    is very busy at this period, in visiting and setting in order the
    branches of the Church in Preston, Clithero, and all the regions
    round about, and holding correspondence with the Elders abroad.

[Sidenote: Judge Elias Higbee's Course at Washington Approved.]

The High Council met at my house in Nauvoo, and resolved that Robert B.
Thompson write a letter to Judge Higbee at Washington, approving his
course and giving him certain names (for which see Thompson's letter),
that he may order subpoenas for them as witnesses in the suit now
before Congress, namely, the Latter-day Saints _versus_ the State of
Missouri, for redress of grievances.

    _Letter of R. B. Thompson to Elias Higbee, Announcing the Approval
    of the Church Authorities of the Latter's Course at Washington_.

    Nauvoo, Hancock County, Illinois,

    March 17th, 1840.

    _Elias Higbee, Esq_.

    Dear And Honored Sir:--It is with the greatest pleasure I sit down
    to write to you at this time, to inform you of the situation and
    state of the Church as regards the object of your mission.

    Since President Joseph Smith returned we have been favored with
    several communications from you, giving a statement of the
    proceedings before the committee, etc. On Monday evening last,
    your letters were read to a large concourse of our brethren, and
    other persons who were assembled to hear the same; and I must say
    that the greatest satisfaction was manifested by the assembled
    multitude, with the {97} noble stand and straightforward and
    honorable course which you had pursued; and before the assembly
    separated, a vote of thanks to you was unanimously agreed upon. I
    can assure you that, from the feelings there, as well as upon other
    occasions, [expressed] there is not only a disposition, but a fixed
    determination, to uphold you in your righteous cause and sustain
    you in your efforts to obtain redress for the injuries which the
    Saints have borne from their unfeeling oppressors, and in bringing
    their case before the authorities of the nation.

    In the evening the High Council assembled at the house of President
    Joseph Smith, Jun., and took your letters into consideration, when
    it was unanimously resolved that a letter should be written to you
    approving the measures which you were taking. The High Council
    likewise send you a list of the names of such persons as they think
    will testify to such facts as you want to substantiate. The names
    are as follows:

    Alanson Ripley,

    Francis Higbee,

    Lyman Wight,

    Tarlton Lewis,

    Edward Partridge,

    Parley P. Pratt,

    Thorit Parsons,

    King Follett,

    Isaac Laney,

    Harvey Redfield,

    Ellis Eames,

    Chapman Duncan,

    Smith Humphrey,

    Erastus Snow,

    John M. Burk,

    Rebecca Judd,

    Heber C. Kimball,

    William Seyley,

    Dr. Isaac Galland,

    William Chapplin,

    Ira Mills,

    Oliver Olney,

    Hyrum Smith,

    Seymour Brunson,

    Samuel Bent,

    Porter Rockwell,

    George A. Smith,

    Stephen Markham,

    Thomas Grover,

    Amanda Smith,

    Lyman Leonard,

    Alma Smith,

    Zebediah Robinson,

    Orson Hyde,

    Charles C. Rich,

    Henry G. Sherwood,

    Elias Smith,

    Sidney Rigdon.

    There probably may be others, who may occur to your mind, whom you
    can send for if you think necessary. We should feel glad if you
    had the assistance of Presidents Smith and Rigdon at this critical
    time, while you have to contend with Jamieson, Linn [and others].
    However I hope you will go forth in the strength of the Lord, and
    that truth will prevail. And I would say, "Twice is he armed who
    hath his quarrel just." The principles, sir, for which you contend
    are true; they are principles of justice, of humanity, of the
    Constitution, and the eternal principles of righteousness.

    Although mankind may depart from those principles and be swayed
    {98} by popular prejudices, and undue influences; yet at the same
    time, that man who contends for the same, although he cannot
    always carry his point, or convince at all times partial and
    interested judges--the gem or light of truth may be darkened, and
    its brilliancy for a while hid--yet when the Son of Righteousness
    shall arise, and disperse the darkness and mist of superstition and
    bigotry; when the true light shines, then shall it shine with all
    its glorious splendor and shed forth its luster with a brilliancy
    upon its advocates as shall altogether surpass the equipage and
    glories of those who are now in power.

    Robert B. Thompson.

    _Letter of Horace R. Hotchkiss to Sidney Rigdon and Joseph Smith,
    Jun.--Inquiring Concerning the Progress Made Before Congress_.

    Fair Haven, March 17th, 1840.

    _Reverends Sidney Rigdon and Joseph Smith, Jun_.:

    Gentlemen:--I some time since addressed a letter to Mr. [Joseph]
    Smith at Philadelphia, to which I have received no reply; and was
    in that city two or three weeks ago, but not being able to hear
    anything of Mr. Smith, I suppose he must of course have left; and
    with the hope of still reaching you, I now send to Washington. I
    should have written you long before, and indeed very often this
    winter, but my health has been miserable; and since my return from
    Philadelphia, I have been confined to my house.

    I beg you to inform me how you are progressing with your petition
    before Congress, and its probable result; whether you have any
    friends in the House or in the Senate, who will bring forward your
    case, and advocate it in sincerity, and persevere in your behalf
    with skill and ability until something is accomplished. Milk and
    water friends in Congress are good for nothing. They must be true,
    have talents, be zealous, or else they will be detrimental rather
    than advantageous to you.

    Should you, gentlemen, and Judge Higbee, come as far east as this,
    it will afford [me] much gratification to have you take up your
    quarters at my house. I did intend to see you at Washington, but my
    health will not now permit.

    With much respect, yours,

    Horace R. Hotchkiss.

    _Sixth Letter of Elias Higbee to the Prophet--Affairs of the Saints
    at Washington--Papers Withdrawn_.

    Washington City, March 24th, 1840.

    Dear Brother:--Our business is at last ended here. Yesterday
    a resolution passed the Senate, that the committee should be
    discharged; and that we might withdraw the accompanying papers,
    which I have {99} done. I have also taken a copy of the memorial,
    and want to be off for the west immediately. I have not gotten a
    letter from President Rigdon, although I have frequently written
    to him. I have received a letter from Brother Bennett, stating
    that he was in the Jerseys, and that he was calculating to have me
    come that way and go home with him; and also that he had business
    which he wanted me to attend to at the office here. When he last
    wrote, he stated that as yet he had no money to get home with, and
    I hardly know what course to take in regard to the matter. If I do
    not receive a letter in two or three days, I design leaving for
    Philadelphia or the west.

    There is one honest Quaker-looking sort of a man here, by the name
    of William Green, (instead of John Green, as I stated in a letter
    to Brother Robinson), who has two iron printing presses, with other
    things necessary, that would come to Commerce, provided you could
    find work for him, and inform him of the same. How much work there
    is to do I know not; therefore merely write that if such a man and
    establishment are wanted, you could easily obtain them, or would
    know where they could be obtained. He believes as much in our
    religion as any other, but not much in any.

    Yours in the Lord,

    Elias Higbee.

    P.S.--I would just observe, that information has reached this
    place, through some of the newspapers, that you have come out for
    Harrison. It is said that the information came by some gentlemen
    who obtained it from you, whilst in your company in passing through
    the state of Indiana. Another paper states that 1,000 houses are to
    be built in Commerce this season, which I hope is the truth.

    I would just observe (on the subject of our business) I am sorry
    Judge Young had not insisted on the motion to print our papers, as
    it would have been opposed; then a speech from Clay and Mr. Preston
    would have been brought forth, as I have since learned: but I think
    it was a trick of the Missouri Senators to slide it along without
    making a noise, by its going to the committee as it did. Judge
    Young says he was anxious to have it brought before the committee,
    but seemed disposed to let it slide along easily, rather than run
    the risk of its being refused.

    If he had let those speeches been made, almost every one would have
    read them; which would have shamed Missouri, (if there is any shame
    in her), and waked up the whole country, so that by another year
    Congress would do something for us. But there is no need of crying
    for spilt milk. I have done all I could in this matter, depending
    on the good judgment of Judge Young to legislate for us to the best
    advantage. I am inclined, however, to think if it was an error, it
    was one of the head, and not of the heart.

    {100} Mr. Hotchkiss, of Fair Haven, Connecticut, has addressed
    a letter to yourself, Brother Rigdon and myself, which seems to
    be written with much good feeling. He desires to know concerning
    our business here, inviting us to make his house our home, should
    we travel in that region. He writes that his health is very bad.
    I have been talking with Mr. Steward concerning a memorial,
    requesting him to bring it before the House; he has promised to
    do so if he can. He says he will talk with some of the members
    respecting it. I have answered Mr. Hotchkiss' letter this day, and
    sent him the report of the committee.

    E. H.

At this time the work of the Lord is spreading rapidly in the United
States and England--Elders are traveling in almost every direction, and
multitudes are being baptized.

    _Letter of Horace R. Hotchkiss to Joseph Smith, Jun.--Offering
    Tract of Land for Sale_.

    Fair Haven, 1st April, 1840.

    _Reverend Joseph Smith, Jun_.:

    My Dear Sir:--After writing you at, and then going to,
    Philadelphia, and not finding you, I addressed a letter to
    Washington City, and received a reply from Judge Higbee, by which
    I first learned of your return to Illinois; and at the same time
    I got the committee's report upon your application to Congress
    for redress of the outrages perpetrated upon your people by the
    Missourians. I am not, I must confess, much disappointed in the
    result; as I know the vacillating, fawning character of many in
    both houses of Congress; and these are not their worst traits
    either, for they not only lack the moral courage to do right, but
    will do what they know to be positively wrong, if they can make
    political capital by it; and will abandon you, me, or any one else,
    with perfect indifference, and heartless treachery, if by doing it
    they can obtain governmental favor, or political preferment. If we
    should not put our faith in princes, it appears most emphatically
    true that we should repose no confidence in politicians. The idea
    conveyed in the report, that exact justice will be meted to you by
    the judicial tribunals of Missouri, is too preposterous to require
    comment. It is indeed a new doctrine, that we should apply to
    robbers, or their supporters, to condemn themselves, to restore
    the valuables they have stolen, and to betray each other for the
    murders they have committed.

    I do not believe (though I am sorry to say it) that you will
    ever receive a just or honorable remuneration for your losses of
    property, or {101} any reparation for the personal indignities,
    privations and sufferings which your people have sustained in
    Missouri. The greatest reliance you have for regaining your
    wealth is in the honorable conduct of your people--their pure
    morals--their correct habits--their indefatigable industry--their
    untiring perseverance--and their well-directed enterprise. These
    constitute a capital which can never be shaken by man, and form
    the basis of all that is great in commercial influence, or in the
    attainment of pecuniary power.

    Judge Higbee informs me that Mr. Rigdon is probably in New Jersey.
    It would have afforded me much pleasure to have seen you all at my
    house, and it was my intention to spend some time at Washington
    while you were there; but my health has been so very infirm, that
    it has prevented me from executing nearly all the arrangements I
    had proposed for myself for the last eight months.

    Knowing the additions constantly joining your society, it has
    occurred to me that some of them may be unprovided with farming
    lands, and I mention at this time, that I am interested in a tract
    of about 12,000 acres of very choice lands, consisting of timber
    and prairie, fifteen or twenty miles from Springfield, upon which
    Mr. Gillett and several other families are settled and cultivating
    most excellent farms. It is one of the best neighborhoods in the
    state.

    I do not know what my co-partners in this tract would say about
    disposing of what remains unsold of the tract, (say eight to nine
    thousand acres,) but I should be disposed to sell upon reasonable
    terms, provided from twenty to forty families, valuable for their
    prudence, industry, and good habits, from your society, can be
    found to form a small colony of practical farmers. I am also
    interested with the same gentlemen in lands near Rock River,
    in Henry and Mercer counties, and believe this would, on many
    accounts, be another extremely desirable place or location for a
    colony of your people. I have said nothing to those owning with
    me relative to this subject, but suppose they would be governed
    materially by two considerations; namely, the characters of the
    purchasers, and the fact of their being actual settlers or not.

    If you think two small colonies of the right sort can be formed
    from your society, you will oblige by informing me at your
    earliest opportunity. The price of the balance in the tract near
    Springfield, including an average proportion of timber, and an
    average proportion of prairie, I should think $4.50 per acre. None
    of the prairie alone has been sold for less than three dollars, and
    some at three and a half; and I am confident that four and a half
    dollars for timber and prairie is very low, and especially as a
    credit, except for a small amount, would be extended to purchasers.
    The other tract is nearly all prairie, but the finest selection of
    that region. It is probably worth three and a half dollars per acre.

    {102} As my paper is out, I have only room to request my respects
    presented to all friends at Commerce. I beg you to tell the editor
    of the _Times and Seasons_, that as soon as my health allows me to
    go to the bank, I shall send him $10.

    Your obedient servant,

    Horace R. Hotchkiss.

    _Letter of Sidney Rigdon to the Prophet_.

    At James Ivans', New Jersey,

    April 3rd, 1840.

    _Brother Joseph Smith, Jun_.

    Dear Sir:--I thought I would occupy a portion of this morning in
    writing to you. By a letter received from Brother Higbee yesterday,
    I have learned that the Senate has decided that they have no
    constitutional right to interfere in the case between us and the
    people of Missouri; and refer us to the courts for redress; either
    those of Missouri or the United States. Now I am confident, that
    there is but one person in Missouri that we can sue with safety,
    and that is Boggs, and he is known to be a bankrupt, and unable to
    pay his debts; that if we should sue him, we will have the cost to
    pay, as he has nothing to pay it with. We are therefore left to
    bear the loss without redress, at present.

    Judge Higbee is on the way home, and has been for ten days. He
    obtained money from Judge Young, to what amount I cannot say, but
    he will be able to tell you when he gets home. The Judge continues
    his friendship, and is ready to accommodate with money, whenever
    called for. Surely he is a friend indeed, and ought never to be
    forgotten.

    I am up to this time without means to get home, but I have no
    uneasiness about it. I shall doubtless get means as soon as my
    health will admit of my going. My health is slowly improving, and I
    think if I have no relapse, I will be able to leave for home some
    time in the month of May, &c.

    Sidney Rigdon.

[Sidenote: Arrival of Brigham Young and Associates in England.]

_Monday, April 6_.--Elders Young, Kimball, Pratt, Smith, and Hedlock
landed in Liverpool, on the first day of the eleventh year of the
Church, after a tedious passage of twenty-eight days, during sixteen
of which they encountered head winds, and one severe storm of three or
four days; and a great portion of the time the decks were covered {103}
with water--all of which tended to increase sea-sickness and suffering.

At the time of sailing President Young's and Elder Kimball's health was
very poor. George A. Smith had the ague for six days in succession.
When the ship left her moorings the shore resounded with the songs of
the Saints, who had come down to bid them farewell; they unitedly sang
"The gallant ship is under weigh," [2] until {104} out of hearing.
The brethren occupied three berths in the forecastle, taking what was
called a steerage passage. With the exception of Elder Kimball, not
one of them had ever been to sea, and the sailors called them "land
lubbers." The ship being loaded with flour and cotton, they were packed
in a small compartment with about 100 or 120 passengers, being a motley
mixture of English, Welsh, Irish, and Scotch, who were returning home
from America to visit their friends, or had got sick of "Yankeedom" and
were leaving for "sweet home."

They had scarcely been at sea twelve hours before the whole of them
were prostrated by sea-sickness. George A. Smith vomited up his
ague. [3] Brother Brigham Young, although confined to his berth by
sea-sickness during the entire journey, was unable to vomit.

On coming into the Mersey the ship cast anchor in order to wait for
the tide, when a small boat put off from the shore. Brothers Young,
Kimball, and Parley P. Pratt went in it to the landing. On reaching
the quay, Brother Young shouted hosannah three times, which he had
promised to do whenever he should land on the shores of Old England.
The brethren then went to No. 8 Union Street, Liverpool, where they
procured bread and wine in order to partake of the Sacrament.

Elders Orson Pratt and George A. Smith, and Reuben Hedlock stayed on
board to look after the baggage. About {105} three p. m., Brother
Young sent a small boat for them, and the boatmen piloted them to the
same place, where they all met together, partook of the Sacrament, and
returned thanks for their safe deliverance.

When they landed they were almost penniless. Two or three of them had
sufficient to buy hats for those who needed them the worst.

    _Minutes of the General Conference of the Church_.

    At a General Conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
    Saints, held in Nauvoo, Hancock County, Illinois, on the sixth day
    of April, A.D. 1840, agreeable to previous appointment, Joseph
    Smith, Jun., was called upon to preside over the meeting, and
    Robert B. Thompson was chosen clerk.

    The Conference was then opened by prayer by Elder John E. Page.

    The President rose, made some observations on the business of the
    Conference, exhorted the brethren who had charges to make against
    individuals, and made some very appropriate remarks respecting
    the pulling the beam out of their own eye, that they may see more
    clearly the mote which was in their brother's eye.

    A letter was read from presidents of the Seventies, wishing for
    an explanation of the steps, which the High Council had taken, in
    removing Elder F. G. Bishop from the quorum of the Seventies to
    that of the High Priests, without any other ordination than he had
    when in the Seventies, and wished to know whether those ordained
    into the Seventies at the same time F. G. Bishop was, had a right
    to the High Priesthood, [4] or not. After observations on the case
    by different individuals, the president gave a statement of the
    authority of the Seventies, and stated that they were Elders and
    not High Priests, and consequently Brother F. G. Bishop had no
    claim to that office. It was then unanimously resolved that Elder
    F. G. Bishop be placed back again into the quorum of the Seventies.

    On motion, resolved that the Conference adjourn until two o'clock.

    Conference met pursuant to adjournment. Prayer by Elder Joseph
    Young.

    Elder Thomas Grover presented charges against Brother D. W. Rogers
    for compiling a hymn-book, and selling it as the one compiled and
    published by Sister Emma Smith; secondly, for writing a private
    letter to New York City, casting reflections on the character of
    Elder John P. Greene; and thirdly, for administering medicine
    unskilfully, which had a bad effect.

    {106} On motion, resolved, that, as Brother Rogers is not present,
    his case be laid over until tomorrow.

    Elder John Lawson then came forward and stated, that in consequence
    of some difficulty existing in the branch of the Church where
    he resided, respecting the Word of Wisdom, fellowship had been
    withdrawn from him, and also from Brother Thomas S. Edwards. After
    hearing the particulars, on motion, resolved, that John Lawson and
    Thomas S. Edwards be restored to fellowship.

    Elder Orson Hyde addressed the Conference at some length, and
    stated that it had been prophesied, some years ago, that he had
    a great work to perform among the Jews; and that he had recently
    been moved upon by the Spirit of the Lord to visit that people, and
    gather up all the information he could respecting their movements,
    expectations, &c., and communicate the same to this Church, and to
    the nation at large; stating that he intended to visit the Jews in
    New York, London, and Amsterdam, and then visit Constantinople and
    the Holy Land.

    On motion, resolved, that Elder Orson Hyde proceed on his mission
    to the Jews, and that letters of recommendation be given him,
    signed by the President and Clerk of the Conference.

    Elder John E. Page then arose, and spoke with much force on the
    subject of Elder Hyde's mission, the gathering of the Jews, and
    the restoration of the house of Israel; proving, in a brief but
    convincing manner, from the Bible, Book of Mormon, and the Book of
    Doctrine and Covenants, that these things must take place, and that
    the time had nearly arrived for their accomplishment.

    Adjourned until tomorrow morning, nine o'clock.

_Tuesday morning, April 7_.

    Conference met pursuant to adjournment. A hymn was sung by the
    choir, and the throne of grace was addressed by Elder Caleb Baldwin.

    Brother D. W. Rogers' case was then called up, and after many
    observations and explanations, it was on motion resolved, that D.
    W. Rogers be forgiven, and the hand of fellowship be continued
    towards him.

    Conference adjourned for one hour, and met pursuant to adjournment.
    A hymn was sung by the choir, followed by prayer by Elder Reynolds
    Cahoon.

    The President called upon the Clerk to read the report of the First
    Presidency and High Council, with regard to their proceedings in
    purchasing lands, and securing a place of gathering for the Saints.
    The report having been read, the President made some observations
    respecting the pecuniary affairs of the Church, and requested the
    brethren to step forward, and assist in liquidating the debts on
    the town plot, so that the poor might have an inheritance.

    {107} The President then gave an account of their mission to
    Washington City, the treatment they received, and the action of the
    Senate on the Memorial which was presented before them. The meeting
    then called for the reading of the Memorial, and the report of the
    Committee on Judiciary, to whom the same was referred, which were
    read.

    On motion, resolved that a committee of five be appointed to draft
    resolutions expressive of the sentiments of this Conference in
    reference to the report. On motion it was resolved, that Robert
    D. Foster, Orson Hyde, John E. Page, Joseph Wood, and Robert B.
    Thompson compose said committee, and report to this Conference.

    Resolved, that this meeting adjourn until tomorrow morning.

_Wednesday morning, April 8_.

    Conference met pursuant to adjournment. A number were confirmed who
    had been baptized the previous evening. Prayer by Elder Marks.

    The Committee appointed to draft resolutions on the report of the
    Senate Committee of the Judiciary were then called upon to make
    their report. Robert B. Thompson of the Committee then read the

    _Resolutions_:

    Whereas, we learn, with deep sorrow, regret, and disappointment,
    that the Committee on the Judiciary to whom was referred the
    Memorial of the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
    Saints (commonly called "Mormons"), complaining of the grievances
    suffered by them in the state of Missouri, have reported
    unfavorably to our cause, to justice, and humanity;

    _Therefore Resolved 1st_: That we consider the report of the
    Committee on Judiciary, unconstitutional, and subversive to the
    rights of a free people, and justly calls for the disapprobation
    of all the supporters and lovers of good government and republican
    principles.

    _Resolved, 2ndly_: That the Committee state, in their report,
    that our Memorial _aggravates_ the case of our oppressors, and at
    the same time say, that they have not examined into the truth or
    falsehood of the facts mentioned in said Memorial.

    _Resolved, 3rdly_: That the Memorial does not aggravate the conduct
    of our oppressors, as every statement set forth in said Memorial
    was substantiated by indubitable testimony; therefore we consider
    the statements of the Committee, in regard to that part, as false
    and ungenerous.

    _Resolved, 4thly_: That that part of the report referring us to
    the justice and magnanimity of the state of Missouri for redress,
    we deem it a great insult to our good sense, better judgment, and
    intelligence, when numerous affidavits, which were laid before
    the Committee, prove that we could only go into the state of
    Missouri contrary to the exterminating order of the Governor, and
    consequently at the risk of our lives.

    {108} _Resolved, 5thly_: That after repeated appeals to the
    constituted authorities of the state of Missouri for redress, which
    were in vain, we fondly hoped that in the Congress of the United
    States, ample justice would have been rendered us; and upon that
    consideration alone, we pledged ourselves to abide their decision.

    _Resolved, 6thly_: That the exterminating order of Governor Boggs
    is a direct infraction of the Constitution of the United States,
    and of the state of Missouri; and the committee in refusing to
    investigate the proceedings of the Executive and others of the
    state of Missouri, and turning a deaf ear to the cries of widows,
    orphans, and innocent blood, we deem no less than seconding the
    proceeding of that murderous clan, whose deeds are recorded in
    heaven, and justly call down upon their heads the righteous
    judgments of an offended God.

    _Resolved, 7thly_: That the thanks of this meeting be tendered to
    the citizens of the state of Illinois, for their kind, liberal, and
    generous conduct towards us; and that we call upon them, as well
    as every patriot in this vast Republic, to aid us in all lawful
    endeavors to obtain redress for the injuries we have sustained.

    _Resolved, 8thly_: That the thanks of this meeting be tendered
    to the delegation of Illinois, for the bold, manly, noble, and
    independent course they have taken in presenting our case before
    the nation, amid misrepresentation, contumely, and abuse, which
    were heaped upon us in our suffering condition.

    _Resolved, 9thly_: That the thanks of this meeting be tendered to
    Governor Carlin of Illinois, Governor Lucas of Iowa Territory, for
    their sympathy, aid, and protection; and to all other honorable
    gentlemen who have assisted us in our endeavors to obtain redress.

    _Resolved, 10thly_: That Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon, and
    Elias Higbee, the Delegates appointed by this Church to visit
    the City of Washington, to present our sufferings before the
    authorities of the nation, be tendered the thanks of this meeting
    for the prompt and efficient manner in which they have discharged
    their duty; and that they be requested, in behalf of the Church
    of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints throughout the world, to
    continue to use their endeavors to obtain redress for a suffering
    people. And if all hopes of obtaining satisfaction for the injuries
    done us be entirely blasted, that they then appeal our case to
    the Court of Heaven, believing that the Great Jehovah, who rules
    over the destiny of nations, and who notices the falling sparrows,
    will undoubtedly redress our wrongs, and ere long avenge us of our
    adversaries. [5]

    On motion, _Resolved_, That the report of the committee on the
    Judiciary, {109} as well as the foregoing Preamble and Resolutions,
    be published in the Quincy papers.

    On motion, _Resolved_, That a committee of three be appointed to
    investigate the recommendations of those persons who wish to obtain
    an ordination to the ministry, and ordain such as are thought
    worthy; and that Elders Bent, Wood, and Hyde compose said committee.

    _Resolved_, That this meeting feel satisfied with the proceeding of
    the Presidency with regard to the sales of town property, &c., and
    that they are requested to continue in their agency.

    _Resolved_, That this meeting adjourn for one hour.

    Conference met pursuant to adjournment.

    After singing the President arose and read the 3rd chapter of
    John's Gospel, after which, prayer was offered by Elder Erastus
    Snow.

    The President commenced making observations on the different
    subjects embraced in the chapter [previously read] particularly the
    3rd, 4th, and 5th verses, illustrating them with a very beautiful
    and striking figure, and throwing a flood of light on the subjects
    brought up to review. He then spoke to the Elders respecting their
    mission, and advised those who went into the world to preach the
    Gospel, to leave their families provided with the necessaries
    of life; and to teach the gathering as set forth in the Holy
    Scripture. That it had been wisdom for the most of the Church
    to keep on this side of the river, that a foundation might be
    established in this place; but that now it was the privilege of the
    Saints to occupy the lands in Iowa, or wherever the Spirit might
    lead them. That he did not wish to have any political influence,
    but wished the Saints to use their political franchise to the best
    of their knowledge.

    He then stated that since Elder Hyde had been appointed to visit
    the Jews, he had felt an impression that it would be well for Elder
    John E. Page to accompany him on his mission. It was resolved that
    Elder John E. Page be appointed to accompany Elder Orson Hyde on
    his mission, and that he have proper credentials given him.

    It was then resolved, that as a great part of the time of the
    Conference had been taken up with charges against individuals,
    which might have been settled by the different authorities of
    the Church, that in future no such cases be brought before the
    Conferences.

    The Committee on ordinations reported that they had ordained
    thirty-one persons to be Elders in the Church, who were ordained
    under the hands of Alpheus Gifford [6] and Stephen Perry, which
    report was accepted.

    {110} Fredrick G. Williams presented himself on the stand, and
    humbly asked forgiveness for his conduct, [while in Missouri], and
    expressed his determination to do the will of God in the future.
    His case was presented to the Conference by President Hyrum Smith,
    when it was unanimously

    _Resolved_,

    That Fredrick G. Williams be forgiven, and be received into the
    fellowship of the Church.

    It was reported that seventy-five persons had been baptized during
    the Conference, and that upwards of fifty had been received into
    the quorum of Seventies.

    President Hyrum Smith dismissed the assembly. After he had made a
    few observations, the Conference was closed, under the blessings of
    the Presidency, until the first Friday in October next.

    Joseph Smith, Jun.,

    President.

Footnotes:

1. This is the record of a very important action. The law of
consecration and stewardship, with which the action deals, was given
to the church by revelation (Doc. and Cov. sec. xlii). Its fundamental
principle is the recognition of God as the possessor of all things, the
earth and the fullness thereof. It is His by right of proprietorship.
He created it and sustains it by His power. This recognized, it follows
that whatsoever man possesses in it, he holds as a stewardship merely.
These principles the Saints were called upon to recognize and act under
in the establishment of Zion in Missouri; and apparently the Saints
in Iowa were disposed to undertake the same order of things in the
settlement they were then making, until stopped by the Prophet. The
action of the Prophet in this instance demonstrates the elasticity in
church government, and law. The Lord, who commanded to move forward,
may also command a halt. He who said take neither purse nor scrip when
going to preach the Gospel (Matt. x:10) may later say, under other
circumstances, "He that hath a purse let him take it, and likewise
his scrip" (Luke xxii:35, 36). So, too, in other matters. The Lord
commanded the colony of Lehi that there should no man among them
"have save it be but one wife, and concubines ye shall have none;"
yet reserved the right to command His people otherwise should the
accomplishment of His purposes require it. (Book of Mormon, Jacob
ii:24-30.)

2. The hymn was composed by W. W. Phelps, and is worthy of reproduction
in extenso.

  The gallant ship is under weigh
  To bear me off to sea,
  And yonder floats the streamer gay
  That says she waits for me.
  The seamen dip the ready oar,
  As rippled waves oft tell,
  They bear me swiftly from the shore:
  My native land, farewell!

  I go, not to plough the main,
  To ease a restless mind,
  Nor yet to toil on battle's plain,
  The victor's wreath to find.
  'Tis not for treasures that are hid
  In mountain or in dell,
  'Tis not for joys like these I bid
  My native land, farewell!

  I go to break the fowler's snare,
  To gather Israel home;
  I go the name of Christ to bear
  In lands and isles unknown.
  And soon my pilgrim feet shall tread
  On land where errors dwell,
  Whence light and truth have long since fled,
  My native land, farewell!

  I go, an erring child of dust,
  Ten thousand foes among,
  Yet on His mighty arm I trust.
  Who makes the feeble strong.
  My sun, my shield, forever nigh.
  He will my fears dispel,
  This hope supports me when I sigh,
  My native land, farewell!

  I go devoted to His cause,
  And to His will resigned;
  His presence will supply the loss
  Of all I leave behind.
  His promise cheers the sinking heart
  And lights the darkest cell,
  To exiled pilgrims grace imparts;
  My native land, farewell!

  I go, it is my Master's call,
  He's made my duty plain,
  No danger can the heart appall
  When Jesus stoops to reign.
  And now the vessel's side we've made,
  The sails their bosoms swell.
  Thy beauties in the distance fade,
  My native land, farewell!

3. It is said that he never had the ague afterwards.

4. To the office of High Priest is what is meant; Seventies, of course,
hold the Melchisedek or High Priesthood.

5. See Introduction to Volume III History of the Church, where
retribution on Missouri is considered at length.

6. Alpheus Gifford was born in Adams township, Berkshire County,
Massachusetts, August 28, 1793. At the age of eighteen, having scarcely
sufficient learning to enable him to read the Bible, he commenced
preaching the Gospel, not for hire, but for the salvation of souls.
In 1817, he married Anna Nash, who bore him seven sons and three
daughters. In the spring of 1831, hearing of the doctrines taught by
Joseph Smith he made diligent inquiry and found they were scriptural
and was baptized and ordained a priest; he brought home five books of
Mormon which he distributed among his friends; he was then living in
Tioga County, Pennsylvania. Soon after he went to Kirtland, Ohio, to
see the Prophet Joseph Smith and the brethren, when he was ordained
an elder; he was accompanied by his brother Levi, Elial Strong,
Eleazer Miller, Enos Curtis, and Abraham Brown, who were baptized. On
returning to Pennsylvania he preached and baptized many, among whom
was Heber C. Kimball. The gifts of the Gospel were enjoyed by many,
signs followed those who believed; devils were cast out; the sick were
healed; many prophesied; some spake with new tongues; while others
interpreted the same. Mr. Calvin Gilmour, with whom Brother Gifford had
previously been associated in preaching, heard him speak in tongues and
interpret. Gilmour declared he understood the languages and that they
were interpreted correctly, and that he knew Gifford had no classical
learning; but that he would rather be damned than believe in Mormonism.

In June 1832, Brother Gifford started for Missouri; traveled to
Cincinnati and wintered there with a few saints who bad been baptized
by Lyman Wight. He arrived in Jackson county, Missouri, in March, 1833,
where he preached extensively; he was driven with the Saints from that
county in the fall of that year. He removed to Clay county, enduring
the persecution incident upon settling in, and final expulsion from,
the same. He went to Kirtland, Ohio, and attended the dedication of the
Temple and received the ordinances there administered. He returned to
Missouri and was driven with the Saints to Far West, Caldwell county.
In the winter of 1839, he was driven from Missouri. He located in the
Morley settlement near Lima, Illinois, and subsequently five miles
above Nauvoo, where he died December 25, 1841. (_Addenda_, Ms. Church
History, Book "C" 2. Also page 404.)

{111}



CHAPTER VI.

Development of the Work in England--The Palestine Mission--Post-Office
Name Changed from Commerce to Nauvoo.

_April 7_.--The brethren [President Brigham Young, _et al_.] found
Elder John Taylor, who, in company with Joseph Fielding, had recently
built up a branch of twenty-eight members in Liverpool.

_April 8_.--President Brigham Young and company went to Elder
Richards', at Preston, by railway; when they arrived there, they had
not a single sixpence left. So emaciated was President Young at this
time from his long sickness, and journey, that when Elder Richards
returned home this day from a mission to Clitheroe, and found him in
his room, he did not know him.

    _Letter of Hon. Richard M. Young to Elias Higbee_.

    Washington City, April 9, 1840.

    _Judge Elias Higbee_:

    Dear Sir:--Having a private opportunity, by Judge Snow, of Quincy,
    I have sent you two receipts, one for $50, and the other for $90,
    making together $140, to Mr. E. I. Philips, cashier of the branch
    of the State Bank of Illinois, at Quincy. When it is convenient
    for you to make payment, will you have the goodness to send the
    money to Mr. Philips, who is instructed to receive it, and apply it
    towards the payment of a note of mine in that bank.

    I received a letter from Mr. Rigdon a few days ago. It was mailed
    in Philadelphia, but was dated on the inside in New Jersey. His
    health is gradually but slowly improving, and he thinks he will set
    out for home some time in May. He wished a small sum of money, $40,
    deposited in one of the banks here, for a gentleman in Buffalo,
    New York, which I have attended to according to his direction and
    request. I also informed him, if he stood in need of more, to call
    on me and it would give me pleasure to accommodate him; so you need
    not be uneasy on that score.

    {112} Nothing new has transpired since you left us, with the
    exception of the death of one of the Connecticut Senators, Mr.
    Thadeus Betts, who died yesterday. His funeral took place today,
    hence no business was transacted in the Senate. We have also lost
    the Cumberland Road Bill by a final vote in the Senate, 20 voting
    for and 22 against it; one single vote from the majority would
    have saved it, by making a tie. The Vice-President was exceedingly
    anxious for the opportunity of getting the casting vote in its
    favor. Mr. Clay, of Kentucky, made a speech against and voted
    throughout against it. Grundy, of Tennessee, Wright of New York,
    and Buchanan of Pennsylvania, three of the leading Democrats in the
    Senate voted for it. There were but seven Whigs who voted for it,
    and thirteen Democrats. I think we will adjourn about the first or
    second Monday in June.

    I received from Mr. Rigdon the Petition and papers in relation to
    a change of postmaster at Commerce, with an affidavit from Doctor
    Galland, all of which have been laid before the proper department.
    As soon as I get an answer, it shall be communicated to you. Don't
    forget to have the _Times and Seasons_ sent to me. Give my respects
    to Rev. Joseph Smith, and accept for yourself my best wishes for
    your happiness.

    Yours, etc.,

    Richard M. Young.

[Sidenote: _The News_.]

In the _Times and Seasons_ of this month is a prospectus for publishing
at Nauvoo, a weekly paper, to be called _The News_. [1]

    _Orson Hyde's Credentials as a Missionary to Palestine_.

    _To all people unto whom these presents shall come, Greeting_--

    Be it known that we, the constituted authorities of the Church
    of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, assembled in Conference at
    Nauvoo, Hancock county, and state of Illinois, on the sixth day
    of April, in the year of our Lord, one thousand eight hundred and
    forty, considering an important event at hand, an event involving
    the interest and fate of the Gentile nations throughout the
    world--from the signs of the times and from declarations contained
    in the oracles of God, we are forced to come to this conclusion.
    The Jewish nations have been scattered abroad among the Gentiles
    for a long period; and in our estimation, the {113} time of the
    commencement of their return to the Holy Land has already arrived.
    As this scattered and persecuted people are set among the Gentiles
    as a sign unto them of the second coming of the Messiah, and also
    of the overthrow of the present kingdoms and governments of the
    earth, by the potency of His Almighty arm in scattering famine and
    pestilence like the frosts and snows of winter, and sending the
    sword with nation against nation to bathe it in each other's blood;
    it is highly important, in our opinion, that the present views and
    movements of the Jewish people be sought after and laid before the
    American people, for their consideration, their profit and their
    learning.

    And feeling it to be our duty to employ the most efficient means
    in our power to save the children of men from "the abomination
    that maketh desolate," we have, by the counsel of the Holy Spirit,
    appointed Elder Orson Hyde, the bearer of these presents, a
    faithful and worthy minister of Jesus Christ, to be our Agent and
    Representative in foreign lands, to visit the cities of London,
    Amsterdam, Constantinople, and Jerusalem; and also other places
    that he may deem expedient; and converse with the priests, rulers,
    and elders of the Jews, and obtain from them all the information
    possible, and communicate the same to some principal paper for
    publication, that it may have a general circulation throughout the
    United States.

    As Mr. Hyde has willingly and cheerfully accepted the appointment
    to become our servant and the servant of the public in distant and
    foreign countries, for Christ's sake, we do confidently recommend
    him to all religious and Christian people, and to gentlemen and
    ladies making no profession, as a worthy member of society,
    possessing much zeal to promote the happiness of mankind, fully
    believing that they will be forward to render him all the pecuniary
    aid he needs to accomplish this laborious and hazardous mission for
    the general good of the human family.

    Ministers of every denomination upon whom Mr. Hyde shall call, are
    requested to hold up his hands, and aid him by their influence,
    with an assurance that such as do this shall have the prayers and
    blessings of a poor and afflicted people, whose blood has flowed
    to test the depths of their sincerity and to crimson the face of
    freedom's soil with martyr's blood.

    Mr. Hyde is instructed by this Conference to transmit to this
    country nothing but simple facts for publication, entirely
    disconnected with any peculiar views of theology, leaving each
    class to make their own comments and draw their own inferences.

    Given under our hands at the time and place before mentioned.

    Joseph Smith, Jun., Chairman.

    Robert B. Thompson, Clerk.

{114} _Sunday, 12_.--Several of the Twelve bore their public testimony
to the Gospel in the Cock Pit, Preston.

The High Council of Nauvoo met at my house, when I proposed that
Brother Hyrum Smith go east with Oliver Granger to settle some business
transactions of the Church which the Council sanctioned; and voted,
"that President Joseph Smith, Jun., make the necessary credentials for
Oliver Granger and Hyrum Smith."

[Sidenote: Earthquakes.]

_Monday, 13_.--From the second of October, 1839, to this date, there
have been one hundred and forty-five shocks of earthquake in Scotland,
reported by Mr. Milne to the Royal Society of Edinburgh. Some of these
shocks were sufficient to alter the natural levels of the ground more
than two degrees, and some witnesses thought four degrees, and caused
houses to rock like boats on the sea.

[Sidenote: Ordination of Willard Richards to the Apostleship.]

_Tuesday, 14_.--A council of the Twelve, namely, Brigham Young, Heber
C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, George
A. Smith and John Taylor, was held at the house of Elder Willard
Richards, in Preston, England, when the latter was ordained to the
Apostleship,--agreeably to the revelation,--by President Young, under
the hands of the quorum present. Other business was transacted, as
also on the following days, all of which may be seen by reference to
President Young's letter of the 17th instant.

_Wednesday, 15_.--Elder Orson Hyde left Commerce for Jerusalem.

_Thursday, 16_.--Elder Orson Hyde met with John E. Page at Lima.

    _Letter of Brigham Young to the Saints of the United
    States--Affairs of the British Mission_.

    Preston, England, April 17, 1840.

    To the Saints in the United States of America: For the comfort of
    the Church in general, in that country, I attempt to address a few
    lines {115} to you, to let you know where we are, and what we are
    doing in this country.

    The work of the Lord is progressing here, and has been ever since
    Elders Orson Hyde and H. C. Kimball left this country. According
    to the account that the Elders give of their labors, there have
    been about eight or nine hundred persons baptized since they left.
    The Gospel is spreading, the devils are roaring. As nigh as I can
    learn, the priests are howling, the tares are binding up, the wheat
    is gathering, nations are trembling, and kingdoms tottering; "men's
    hearts failing them for fear, and for looking for those things that
    are coming on the earth." The poor among men are rejoicing in the
    Lord, and the meek do increase their joy. The hearts of the wicked
    do wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.

    But I rejoice that I am counted worthy to be one of the number to
    carry salvation to the poor and meek of the earth. Brethren, I want
    to say many things, but I shall not have room on this paper, as I
    design giving the minutes of our conference below.

    After a long and tedious voyage of 28 days on the water, we landed
    in Liverpool, Elders Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson
    Pratt, George A. Smith, Reuben Hedlock, were in the company. We
    rejoiced in the Lord, and when we cast our minds upon the Saints in
    that country, [the United States] we could, by faith participate in
    their joys, realizing they were met in conference, it being the 6th
    day of April. We soon found a room that we could have to ourselves,
    which made our solemn assembly glorious. We blest each other and
    prepared for our labor. The next day we found Elder Taylor in the
    city. There had been about thirty baptized. On Wednesday went to
    Preston; met with the church on Sunday, and bore testimony to the
    things the Lord is doing in these last day's. President Joseph
    Fielding gave out an appointment for a conference for the church on
    Wednesday, the 15th.

    At a council of the Twelve, held in Preston, England, on the 14th
    of April, 1840, it being the 9th day of the 1st month of the 11th
    year of the rise of the Church of Jesus Christ, Elders Brigham
    Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Wilford
    Woodruff, John Taylor and George A. Smith, being present, Elder
    Brigham Young was called to preside, and Elder John Taylor chosen
    secretary.

    The council was opened by prayer by Elder Brigham Young. Elder
    Willard Richards was ordained to the office of an Apostle, and
    received into the quorum of the Twelve by unanimous vote, according
    to previous revelation. Elder Brigham Young was unanimously chosen
    as the President of the Twelve. [2]

    {116} Resolved, that he who acts as the secretary of the quorum,
    shall prepare the minutes of the conference of the quorum, and
    deposit them in the hands of the president for keeping.

    Moved by Elder Kimball, and seconded by Elder Richards, that twenty
    of the Seventies be sent for, and that it be left discretionary
    with the President of the Twelve to send for more if he think
    proper. Conference adjourned. Benediction by Elder Kimball.

    At a general conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
    Saints, held in the Temperance Hall, Preston, Lancashire, England,
    on the 15th of April, 1840, President Joseph Fielding called upon
    Elder Kimball to preside, and Elder William Clayton was chosen
    clerk, it being the 10th day of the 1st month of the 11th year of
    the rise of the Church.

    The meeting was opened by singing, and prayer by Elder Kimball.
    Elder Kimball then called upon the Elders to represent the
    different branches of the Church. Elder Joseph Fielding represented
    the church in Preston, consisting of about three hundred members,
    seven Elders, eight Priests, six Teachers, and two Deacons. Elder
    Peter Melling represented the church in Penworthan, consisting of
    seventy-three members, three Elders, one Priest, two Teachers. John
    Jackson represented the church at Southport, consisting of twenty
    members, one Priest, and one Teacher. Elder John Moon represented
    the church at Danbers Lane, and neighborhood--members generally in
    good standing, consisting of fifty-four members, one Elder, two
    Priests, three Teachers. Richard Benson, represented the church at
    Hunter's Hill and neighborhood, consisting of seventeen members,
    one Elder, one Priest, one Teacher.

    Elder Amos Fielding, represented the church at Bolton, consisting
    of sixty members, one Elder, two Priests, two Teachers. Elder Amos
    Fielding represented the church at Heskin, consisting of three
    members, one Elder. Elder Amos Fielding represented the Church at
    Radcliff, consisting of ten members. Elder Withnal represented
    the {117} church at Whittle, consisting of eighteen members, one
    Elder, four Priests. Elder Francis Clark represented the church
    at Ribchester, consisting of twenty-five members, two Elders, one
    Priest. Elder Thomas Richardson represented the church at Burnley,
    consisting of twenty four members, generally in good standing, one
    Priest, one Teacher. Elder Francis Moon represented the church
    at Blackburn, consisting of fifteen members, one Priest. Elder
    James Smithies represented the church at Chardgley and Thornley,
    consisting of twenty-nine members, two Elders, one Priest, one
    Teacher, one Deacon.

    Priest John Ellison represented the church at Waddington,
    consisting of fifty members, two Priests, two Teachers, one Deacon.
    Elder Thomas Smith represented the church at Clitheroe, consisting
    of twenty-seven members, one Elder, three Priests. Elder Thomas
    Smith represented the church at Catburn, consisting of eighty-four
    members, one Elder, two Priests, two Teachers, one Deacon. Elder
    Thomas Smith represented the church at Downham, consisting of
    twenty members, one Teacher, one Deacon.

    Elder Thomas Smith represented the church at Gridleton, consisting
    of five members. Elder William Clayton represented the church at
    Manchester, consisting of two hundred and forty members, three
    Elders, five Priests, four Teachers, one Deacon. Elder William
    Clayton represented the church at Stockport, consisting of forty
    members, one Priest, two Teachers, one Deacon. Elder William
    Clayton represented the church at Peover and Macclesfield,
    consisting of thirty members, three Priests. Elder William
    Clayton represented the church at Duckinfield, consisting of
    thirty members, one Priest. Elder William Clayton represented the
    church at Altrincham, consisting of eight members, one Priest,
    one Teacher. Elder William Clayton represented the church at
    Middlewich, consisting of six members.

    Elder David Wilding represented the church at Bury and Elton,
    consisting of twelve members. Elder Wilford Woodruff represented
    the church in the Potteries, consisting of one hundred and one
    members, one Elder, two Priests, four Teachers, one Deacon.
    Elder Wilford Woodruff represented the church at Herefordshire,
    consisting of one hundred and sixty members, one Elder, two
    Priests; about forty of them were Methodist preachers of the United
    Brethren.

    Elder John Taylor represented the church at Liverpool, consisting
    of twenty-eight members. Elder Joseph Fielding represented the
    church at Alston, Cumberland, consisting of forty members,
    two Elders, two Priests, two Teachers. Elder Willard Richards
    represented the church at Brampton, consisting of thirty members,
    one Elder, one Priest. Elder Willard Richards represented the
    church at Bedford, consisting of forty members, one Elder, one
    Priest. Elder Willard Richards {118} represented the church at
    Scotland, consisting of twenty-one members, three Elders.

    The meeting was then adjourned for one hour. The conference again
    assembled at half-past one o'clock. Meeting opened by prayer, and
    business commenced.

    Elder John Moon represented the church at Layland Moss, consisting
    of six members, one Priest.

    Elder Willard Richards having been previously ordained into the
    quorum of the Twelve, according to previous revelation, it was
    moved by Elder Young, and seconded by Elder Taylor, that Elder
    Hyrum Clark be appointed as a counselor to Elder Fielding, in the
    place of Elder Richards; carried unanimously.

    Moved by Elder Fielding, seconded by Elder Young, that a hymnbook
    should be published; carried. Moved and seconded, that the
    publishing of the hymn-book shall be done by the direction of the
    Twelve; carried.

    Moved and seconded that a monthly periodical shall be published
    under the direction and superintendence of the Twelve, for the
    benefit and information of the Church, as soon as a sufficient
    number of subscribers shall be obtained; carried.

    Moved and seconded that Brother John Blazard, of Samsbury, be
    ordained to the office of a Priest; carried.

    Moved and seconded that Brother James Cobridge, of Thornley, be
    ordained to the office of Priest; carried.

    Elder Kimball then laid before the conference the importance and
    propriety of ordaining a Patriarch to bestow patriarchal blessings
    on the fatherless, &c.; referred to the Twelve, whose business it
    is to select one, and ordain him according to the directions of the
    Spirit.

    After various remarks and addresses given by the Elders, President
    Fielding and his counselors proceeded to ordain Brothers Blazard
    and Cobridge to their offices, as stated above.

    Elder Kimball then called upon the clerk to read over the minutes
    of the conference, which being done, they were received by the
    unanimous voice of the conference.

    Moved by Elder Young, and seconded by Elder Parley P. Pratt, that
    this conference be adjourned until the 6th of July next, to be held
    in Preston, at 10 o'clock a. m.; carried. Meeting then adjourned.

    H. C. Kimball, President.

    Wm. Clayton, Clerk.

    _Council Meeting of the Twelve in England--Hymn-Book and the
    "Millennial Star" Projected_.

    The Council met pursuant to adjournment, April 16th, 1840. The
    number of the quorum the same as on the 14th.

    {119} Moved by Elder Young, seconded by Elder Taylor, that Elder
    Parley P. Pratt be chosen as the editor of the monthly periodical
    for the Church.

    Moved by Elder Kimball, seconded by Parley P. Pratt, that a
    committee of three be appointed to make a selection of hymns.

    Moved by Elder Orson Pratt, and seconded by Elder Wilford Woodruff,
    that Elders Brigham Young, Parley P. Pratt, and John Taylor form
    the committee for that purpose.

    Moved by Elder Willard Richards, seconded by Elder George A. Smith,
    that the name of the paper or periodical be the _Latter-day Saints
    Millennial Star_.

    Moved by Elder Brigham Young, seconded by Elder Orson Pratt, that
    the size of the paper, its plan, and price be left at the disposal
    of the editor.

    Moved by Elder Brigham Young, seconded by Elder Heber C. Kimball,
    that the Saints receive a recommend to the Church in America to
    move in small or large bodies, inasmuch as they desire to emigrate
    to that new country.

    Moved by Elder Brigham Young, seconded by Parley P. Pratt, that we
    recommend no one to go to America that has money, without assisting
    the poor according to our counsel from time to time.

    Moved by Elder John Taylor, seconded by Elder Parley P. Pratt, that
    the copyright of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants and the Book of
    Mormon be secured as quick as possible.

    Moved by Elder Woodruff, seconded by Elder Willard Richards, that
    Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Parley P. Pratt be the
    committee to secure the copyright.

    Moved by Elder Heber C. Kimball, and seconded by Elder Willard
    Richards, that Elder Peter Melling be ordained an evangelical
    minister [Patriarch] in Preston.

    Moved by Elder Heber C. Kimball, that the Twelve meet here on the
    6th of July next, seconded by Elder Wilford Woodruff; and carried.

    Moved by Elder Willard Richards, and seconded by Elder Wilford
    Woodruff, that the editor of the periodical keep an account of all
    the receipts and expenditures connected with the printing, general
    expense, &c., and the books at all times be open for the inspection
    of the Council.

    The above resolutions were unanimously adopted. The conference
    closed by prayer.

    John Taylor, Clerk.

    _Letter of Brigham Young to the Prophet_.

    _To President Joseph Smith and Counselors_:

    Dear Brethren:--You no doubt will have the perusal of this letter,
    and minutes of our conference; this will give you an idea of what
    we {120} are doing in this country. If you see anything in or about
    the whole affair, that is not right, I ask, in the name of the Lord
    Jesus Christ, that you would make known unto us the mind of the
    Lord, and His will concerning us. I believe that I am as willing to
    do the will of the Lord, and take counsel of my brethren, and be
    a servant of the Church, as ever I was in my life; but I can tell
    you, I would like to be with my old friends; I like new friends,
    but I cannot part with my old ones for them.

    Concerning the hymn-book--when we arrived here, we found the
    brethren had laid by their old hymn-books, and they wanted new
    ones; for the Bible, religion, and all is new to them. When I came
    to learn more about carrying books into the states, or bringing
    them here, I found the duties were so high that we never should
    want to bring books from the states.

    I request one favor of you, that is, a letter from you, that I
    may hear from my friends. I trust that I will remain your friend
    through life and in eternity. As ever.

    Brigham Young.

_April 17_.--This day the Twelve blessed and drank a bottle of wine at
Penworthan, made by Mother Moon forty years before. Held a Council at
her house in the evening, and ordained Peter Melling, Patriarch. [3]

The following is the aggregate number of churches, official and private
members represented at the above Conferences, held in Preston, England:
Elders, 36; Priests, 54; Teachers, 36; Deacons, 11; members, 1,686; all
contained in 34 branches.

_Saturday, 18_.--Elders Young, Woodruff, and George A. Smith went to
Burslem, and Elders Kimball and Richards to Chaidgley.

_Sunday, 19_.--The High Council voted to meet at my office every
Saturday at two in the afternoon.

[Sidenote: Mission Opened in Scotland--Orson Pratt.]

_Monday, 20_.--Elders Young and Woodruff went to Wolverhampton. About
this time Elder Orson Pratt went to Edinburgh, Scotland. Elder Taylor
returned to Liverpool.

    {121} _Letter of Robert Johnstone to Senator Young--Postoffice Name
    Changed from Commerce to Nauvoo_.

    Postoffice Department, Appointment Office,

    21st April, 1830.

    Sir:--I have the honor to inform you, that the Postmaster General
    has this day changed the name of the postoffice at Commerce,
    Hancock county, Illinois, to "Nauvoo," and appointed George W.
    Robinson postmaster thereof.

    Very respectfully, your obedient servant,

    Robert Johnstone,

    Second Assistant Postmaster General.

    To the Hon. Richard M. Young, U.S. Senate.

Elders Young and Woodruff visited the old cathedral at Worcester on
their way to Ledbury, where they arrived this night.

    _Letter of Senator Young to Judge Elias Higbee--Postoffice Name,
    etc_.

    Washington City, April 22, 1840.

    Dear Sir:--After your departure from this city, I received, under
    cover from the Reverend Sidney Rigdon, the petition mentioned
    by you, for the appointment of George W. Robinson as postmaster
    at Commerce. This petition I laid before the Honorable Robert
    Johnstone, second assistant postmaster general, who has appointed
    Mr. Robinson as requested.

    We found, on examination of the papers, and a letter from Dr.
    Gallad, that there was a request that the name of the postoffice
    should be changed to that of Nauvoo, a Hebrew term, signifying a
    beautiful place. Mr. Johnstone, at my instance, has changed the
    name accordingly, in the supposition that it would be agreeable to
    the citizens concerned. Will you please advise with the Rev. Joseph
    Smith and others most immediately interested, and if the change of
    the name to Nauvoo should not be acceptable, it can on application
    be restored to that of Commerce.

    I received a letter from Malcolm McGregor, Esq., postmaster at
    Carthage, a few days ago, in which he urges the necessity of having
    the mail carried twice a week, between Carthage and Nauvoo, and
    expresses the opinion that the additional expenses would not exceed
    one hundred and fifty dollars, as the mail is carried on horseback.
    I have brought the subject before the proper department as
    requested by Mr. McGregor, and hope to be able to succeed; although
    the Postoffice Department, owing to pecuniary embarrassment, is not
    in a situation to extend facilities at the present time.

    {122} Please present my respects to Mr. Smith, and accept for
    yourself my kindest regards.

    Very respectfully, &c.,

    Richard M. Young.

    To Judge Elias Higbee.

_Wednesday, 22_.--Elders Young and Woodruff organized a branch of the
Church at Frooms Hill, Herefordshire.

_Thursday, 23_.--Elders Kimball and Richards returned to Preston. Elder
Young visited at Moor Ends Cross, and 24th preached at Malvern Hill.
Elder Kimball went to Eccleston and continued some days visiting the
churches around Preston.

_Saturday, 25_.--Elder Richards went to Manchester, found the
_Prospectus_ for the _Millennial Star_ ready. Elder Young returned
to Frooms Hill, and stayed at Brother John Benbow's till the 30th,
preaching, and writing letters to his friends in America.

_Wednesday, 29_.--Elders Hyde and Page were at Quincy, Illinois.

Elder Woodruff wrote as follows:

    _Letter of Wilford Woodruff to Don Carlos Smith--Success of
    Woodruff's Ministry_.

    Ledbury, Herefordshire, England,

    April 29, 1840.

    _Elders Ebenezer Robinson and Don Carlos Smith_:

    Brethren:--As Elder Young is writing, I am privileged with a space
    of a few lines: knowing that our friends are desirous to hear of
    the work of the Lord in this land, I make the following remarks
    concerning the mercy of God and my labors.

    Since I last wrote you, (I wrote you a lengthy letter, dated
    February 27th, in which I gave you an account of my travels,
    voyage, and labors from the time I left Montrose unto the date of
    my letter, which I trust you have received,) I continued laboring
    in Staffordshire until the first of March, when I felt it to be
    the will of the Lord that I should go more to the south part of
    England. I left the care of the Staffordshire church in the hands
    of Elder Turley, and traveled eighty miles south, in a region where
    the word had not been preached. I commenced preaching near Ledbury,
    Herefordshire; this is about forty miles from Bristol, {123}
    forty from Birmingham, fourteen from Worcester, one hundred and
    twenty from London. As soon as I began to teach, many received my
    testimony. I there preached one month and five days, and baptized
    the superintendent of the church of the United Brethren, a branch
    of the Methodist church, and with him 45 preachers, mostly of the
    same order; and about 114 members, making 160 in all. This put into
    my hands, or under my care, more than forty established places of
    preaching, licensed according to law, including one or two chapels.
    This opened a large field for the spread of the work in this
    country.

    Among the number baptized are some of most all churches and classes
    as well as preachers. There is one constable, and one clerk of the
    Church of England, with numbers of their members. But in the midst
    of my labors I received a letter stating that the Twelve had just
    arrived and wished me to come to Preston, and meet with them in
    conference. Consequently I traveled 160 miles to Preston and was
    once more permitted to strike hands with my brethren from America,
    and sit in conference with them, the minutes of which you have.

    After conference I returned to Herefordshire in company with Elder
    Brigham Young. We have again commenced our labors here, and there
    will be many baptized in this region. I have now more than 200 on
    my list, and scores are now waiting for an opportunity to receive
    the ordinance of baptism; and the work is progressing in all parts
    of this country where it is faithfully proclaimed. I understand
    that Elders Wright and Mulliner are opening some permanent doors
    in Scotland; and we have many calls through many parts of this
    country, even more than we are able to fill.

    I desire the prayers of the Saints; that I may have wisdom and
    grace according to my day, and do the work of God in meekness and
    humility.

    Wilford Woodruff.

_Thursday, 30_.--Elders Young, Woodruff, and Richards met at Elder
Kington's, at Dymock.

    _Letter of Elders Hyde and Page to the Prophet--Plans for the
    Palestine Mission_.

    Columbus, May 1, 1840.

    _President Smith_:

    Sir:--The mission upon which we are sent swells greater and
    greater. As there is a great work to be done in Germany, as
    manifested to us by the Spirit, the following plan has been
    suggested to us; viz., to write a set of lectures upon the faith
    and doctrine of our Church, giving a brief {124} history of
    the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, and an account of its
    contents in as clear and plain a style as possible; together with
    the outlines and organization and government of the Church of
    Latter-day Saints, drawn from the Doctrine and Covenants with all
    the wisdom and care possible; and get the same translated into
    German, and publish it when we arrive in Germany, and scatter it
    through the German empire. Is this correct? Should we consider it
    necessary to translate the entire Book of Mormon into German, and
    Doctrine and Covenants too, are we or are we not at liberty to do
    so? Should we deem it necessary to publish an edition of hymn-books
    in any country, are we at liberty to do it? The fact is, we need
    such works, and we cannot get them from the church here; and if
    we could, we could not well carry them with us, at least in any
    quantity.

    We feel that we are acting under the direction of the Presidency
    of the Church; and the reason that we make these inquiries, is,
    that we do not wish to step beyond our limits, or bring ourselves
    into a snare and dishonor by taking liberties that are not ours. We
    feel that all our exertions and interests shall become subservient
    to building up the Kingdom of God. We wish to be co-workers with
    you and with the Spirit of the Lord. We did not converse so much
    upon these literary works as we should have done before we left.
    The fact is, we did not begin to see the greatness of our mission
    before we left home; our minds were in a nutshell.

    It seems to us that we should spread this work among all people,
    languages and tongues, so far as possible; and gather up all jewels
    among the Jews besides. Who is sufficient for these things?

    As agents for the Church abroad, and as co-workers with yourself,
    in spreading this kingdom to the remotest corners of the earth, are
    we at liberty to translate and publish any works that we may think
    necessary, or that the circumstances in which we are placed seem to
    require whether original, or works published by the Church? If we
    are not at liberty to take this wide range, please tell us how far
    we may go.

    We are setting this great work before the people as an inducement
    to them to help us. If we are setting our standard too high, a word
    from you will bring it down. We have held a two days' meeting in
    this place; but in consequence of continual rains, which swelled
    the creeks so high, the people could not get to us. The meeting was
    four miles from Columbus; one only baptized.

    We have now an opportunity to ride as far east as Indiana, beyond
    the metropolis, and have the privilege to stop and preach by the
    way. Will you write to us at Cincinnati, and much oblige.

    Your brethren in the Kingdom of God,

    Orson Hyde,

    John E. Page.

    {125} P. S.--Will you please send word to Marinda, that I want her
    to write to me at Cincinnati, Ohio. Please bear it in mind and
    oblige thy friend.

    O. H.

[Sidenote: Commotions in the World.]

_Friday, May 1_.--The town of Baji, in the county of Baes, on the
river Danube, was almost totally destroyed by fire; about two thousand
houses were burnt, with the palace, several churches, and all the great
corn magazines; leaving about sixteen thousand inhabitants destitute.
The plague is raging in the East--at Silistria, Broussa, Alexandria,
Aleppo, &c.; and wars and rumors of wars in Spain, Mexico and South
American governments; French and Arabs in Africa, Russia and Circassia,
Egypt, England and the East Indies, and the Canada Revolution; all
betoken the fulfillment of prophecy.

_Thursday, 7_.--The city of Natchez was this day to a great extent
destroyed, almost in a moment, by a whirlwind, storm and tempest. It
is reported that sixty boats sunk, houses and churches blown to atoms,
more than three hundred persons killed, and $5,000,000 of property
destroyed; nearly the whole country on the Mississippi for 1,100 miles
from its mouth is under water.

    _Letter of Brigham Young to the Prophet--Affairs of the British
    Mission_.

    Lugwardine, Herefordshire, England,

    May 7, 1840.

    Brother Joseph Smith:--Through the mercy of our heavenly Father, I
    am alive and in pretty good health; better than I should have been,
    had I remained in America. I trust that you and family are well,
    and I ask my heavenly Father that we may live forever; but not to
    be chased about by mobs, but live to enjoy each other's society in
    peace. I long to see the faces of my friends again in that country
    once more, It is better for me to be here, because the Lord has
    called me to this great work, but it is hard for me to be parted
    from my old friends whom I have proved to be willing to lay down
    their lives for each other. I feel as though the Lord would grant
    me the privilege of sometime seeing my old friends in America. Give
    my best wishes to your wife. I remember her in my prayers, and also
    Father and Mother Smith. I remember {126} the time when I first
    saw Mother Smith, and the trials she had when the work of the Lord
    first commenced in her family. I beg to be remembered to Brother
    Rigdon and family, also to Brother Hyrum and family, and to all the
    faithful in Christ.

    The brethren that have come from America are all well and doing
    well. I want to ask some questions. Shall we print the Book of
    Mormon in this country immediately? They are calling for it from
    every quarter. The duties are so high on books, we need not think
    of bringing them from America. Another question, is the Book of
    Doctrine and Covenants to be printed just as it is now, to go to
    the nations of the earth; and shall we give it to them as quickly
    as we can? Or what shall we do? Will the Twelve have to be together
    to do business as a quorum? Or shall they do business in the name
    of the Church? Why I ask this is for my own satisfaction; if the
    Lord has a word for us, for one I am willing to receive it.

    I wish you to write as soon as you receive this, and let me know
    about the Book of Mormon, whether we shall proceed to publish
    it immediately or not, or whether we shall do according to our
    feelings. If I should act according to my feelings, I should hand
    the Book of Mormon to this people as quickly as I could. The people
    are very different in this country from what the Americans are.
    They say it cannot be possible that men should leave their homes
    and come so far, unless they were truly the servants of the Lord;
    they do not seem to understand argument; simple testimony is enough
    for them; they beg and plead for the Book of Mormon, and were it
    not for the priests, the people would follow after the servants of
    the Lord and inquire what they should do to be saved. The priests
    feel just as they did in the days of the Savior. If they let "this
    sect alone, all men will believe on them, and the Romans will come
    and take away our place and nation."

    I wish you would tell me how Cousin Lemuel gets along with his
    business, and all the boys on the half-breed track, and the whole
    breed. I think a great deal about our friends, families, and
    possessions. I look for the time when the Lord will speak so that
    the hearts of the rebellious will be pierced. You will remember the
    words of the Savior to His disciples; He says, to you is given to
    know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them that are
    without, all things are in parables.

    The brethren here are very anxious to emigrate to that country;
    some want to come this fall: where shall they go? Their customs
    are different from ours, and it would be more pleasant for them to
    settle by themselves. Almost without exception it is the poor that
    receive the Gospel. I think there will be some [who will go] over
    this fall. My counsel to such as intend to go is, that they go to
    the western states, where they {127} can live among the farmers and
    wait for orders from the authorities of the Church, and all will be
    well.

    You must excuse my bad writing. I have only caught at ideas. I want
    to know about the brethren's coming over this fall. I think some
    of us will come. We shall send our papers to you, and to a number
    of the rest of the brethren. I wish you would have the goodness to
    give me a pretty general knowledge of the Church, for I feel for
    them, and pray for them continually. We need help very much in this
    country. One American can do more here than a number of Elders who
    are raised up here by the preaching of the Gospel. We have sent for
    some to come. I wish you would encourage them to come as quickly as
    they can.

    If we could go four ways at a time, we could not fill all the calls
    we have for preaching. I shall expect such counsel from you about
    the Elders coming as you shall think necessary for us and them to
    have. I wish to know what the prospect is about the government's
    doing anything for us. When we left New York I thought there was
    but a poor chance for us.

    Concerning calling Seventies and sending them to other countries,
    I should like to know whether it would be proper to ordain them
    to that office or not while here. Had any of us better come back
    this fall? I suppose that some that come over with us will return;
    Brothers Clark and Hedlock, and Brother Turley if the latter gets
    at liberty. I suppose you have heard that he is in prison. He has
    been there ever since my arrival in England, and how long he will
    remain the Lord only knows. He was put there through the influence
    of a priest, as nigh as I can learn, for some old pretended claim,
    but no one can find out what that claim is.

    I have just met with Brother Woodruff; he tells me that the Church
    in this region of country numbers between three and four hundred;
    it is only about three months since Brother Woodruff commenced to
    labor here. I have just received a letter from Brother Turley,
    which states he expects to leave his place the next day. Brother
    Woodruff sends his respects.

    I am as ever,

    Brigham Young.

[Sidenote: Release of Elder Turley from prison.]

_Saturday, 9_.--Elder Theodore Turley was released from Stafford jail,
where he had been confined since his arrest on the 16th of March last,
at the instigation of John Jones, a Methodist preacher, on the pretense
of a claim arising under a partnership with another man fifteen years
ago, before he left {128} England; but the real object was to stop his
preaching. He was without provisions for several days, but the poor
Saints in the Potteries, on learning his condition, supplied his wants,
some of the sisters actually walking upwards of twenty miles to relieve
him. He preached several times to the debtors, was visited by Elders
Woodruff, Richards, George A. Smith, A. Cordon, and others, and was
dismissed from prison on his persecutors ascertaining their conduct
was about to be exposed. This rather encouraged than disheartened the
Elders, as I had told them on their leaving Nauvoo, to be of good
courage, for some of them would have to look through grates before
their return.

_Thursday, 14_.--The papers of this date report that the island of
Ternate [4] was nearly ruined by earthquakes on the 14th and 15th
February, 1840.

    _Letter of the Prophet to Elders Hyde and Page--Palestine Mission
    Considered_.

    Nauvoo, Hancock County, Illinois, May 14th, 1840.

    _To Orson Hyde and John E. Page_:

    Dear Brethren:--I am happy in being informed by your letter
    that your mission swells "larger and larger." It is a great and
    important mission, and one that is worthy those intelligences
    who surround the throne of Jehovah to be engaged in. Although it
    appears great at present, yet you have but just begun to realize
    the greatness, the extent and glory of the same. If there is
    anything calculated to interest the mind of the Saints, to awaken
    in them the finest sensibilities, and arouse them to enterprise
    and exertion, surely it is the great and precious promises made by
    our heavenly Father to the children of Abraham; and those engaged
    in seeking the outcasts of Israel, and the dispersed of Judah,
    cannot fail to enjoy the Spirit of the Lord and have the choicest
    blessings of Heaven rest upon them in copious effusions.

    Brethren, you are in the pathway to eternal fame, and immortal
    glory: and inasmuch as you feel interested for the covenant people
    of the Lord, the God of their fathers shall bless you. Do not be
    discouraged on {129} account of the greatness of the work; only
    be humble and faithful, and then you can say, "What art thou, O
    great mountain! before Zerubbabel shalt thou be brought down."
    He who scattered Israel has promised to gather them; therefore
    inasmuch as you are to be instrumental in this great work, He will
    endow you with power, wisdom, might, and intelligence, and every
    qualification necessary; while your minds will expand wider and
    wider, until you can circumscribe the earth and the heavens, reach
    forth into eternity, and contemplate the mighty acts of Jehovah in
    all their variety and glory.

    In answer to your inquiries respecting the translation and
    publication of the Book of Mormon, hymn-book, history of the
    Church, &c., &c., I would say that I entirely approve of the
    same, and give my consent, with the exception of the hymn book,
    as a new edition, containing a greater variety of hymns, will be
    shortly published or printed in this place, which I think will be a
    standard work. As soon as it is printed, you shall have some sent
    to you, which you may get translated, and printed into any language
    you please.

    Should we not be able to send some to you, and there should be a
    great call for hymn books where you may be, then I should have no
    objection to your publishing the present one. Were you to publish
    the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, or hymn-book, I desire
    the copyrights of the same to be secured in my name.

    With respect to publishing any other work, either original, or
    those which have been published before, you will be governed by
    circumstances; if you think necessary to do so, I shall have
    no objection whatever. It will be well to study plainness and
    simplicity in whatever you publish, "for my soul delighteth in
    plainness."

    I feel much pleased with the spirit of your letter--and be assured,
    dear brethren, of my hearty co-operation, and my prayers for your
    welfare and success. In answer to your inquiry in a former letter,
    relative to the duty of the Seventies in regulating churches, &c.,
    I say that the duties of the Seventies are more particularly to
    preach the Gospel, and build up churches, rather than regulate
    them, that a High Priest may take charge of them. If a High Priest
    should be remiss in his duty, and should lead, or suffer the church
    to be led astray, depart from the ordinances of the Lord, then
    it is the duty of one of the Seventies, acting under the special
    direction of the Twelve, being duly commissioned by them with their
    delegated authority, to go to the church, and if agreeable to a
    majority of the members of said church, to proceed to regulate and
    put in order the same; otherwise, he can have no authority to act.

    Joseph Smith, Jun.

{130} _Friday, 15_.

    _Letter of Willard Richards to the Editor of the Millennial
    Star--Reporting Labors_.

    Ledbury, Herefordshire, May 15th, 1840.

    _To the Editor of the Millennial Star_:

    Beloved Brother:--Two weeks ago this day, I parted with Brothers
    Young and Woodruff in this place, taking different locations in
    this part of the vineyard, originally opened by Brother Woodruff,
    and after visiting various places in Herefordshire, Worcestershire,
    and Gloucestershire, preaching daily, talking night and day, and
    administering the ordinances of the Gospel as directed by the
    Spirit, we have again this day found ourselves together, and Elder
    Kington in our midst (he is devoted wholly to the ministry). By
    comparing minutes we find there have been in these two weeks about
    112 baptized; 200 confirmed; 2 Elders, about 20 Priests, and 1
    Teacher ordained; and the Church in these regions now numbers
    about 320. The branches are small, the brethren much scattered;
    consequently the field is so large that the reapers cannot call to
    each other from side to side, neither can they often see each other
    without a telescope.

    There are many doors open which we cannot fill; calls for preaching
    on almost every hand, which we cannot answer. Oh! that the Saints
    would pray to the Lord of the harvest to send forth laborers!

    I have this day received a letter from my sister in Massachusetts,
    giving me the intelligence of the death of my aged father. The
    work of the Lord is rolling forth in that part of the land, such
    intelligence as this from our native land makes our hearts rejoice,
    even in affliction.

    Your brother in the everlasting covenant,

    Willard Richards.

Footnotes:

1. It was announced in the Prospectus that the _News_ would "take
perfectly neutral ground, in regard to politics, and it is the fixed
determination of the publishers to studiously avoid all party strife,
and political wranglings which are so prevalent at the present time."
The _News_, however, never materialized.

2. President Young was also President of the Twelve by virtue of
seniority of ordination into the quorum. When the quorum of the Twelve
was first organized the members took their place according to age. This
arrangement brought Thomas B. Marsh to the head of the quorum, and made
him President. After this first arrangement, however, the members of
the quorum took their place in it according to seniority of ordination,
not of age. (See Volume II this work, pp. 219, 220, and notes). Brigham
Young was the second man ordained into the quorum, Lyman E. Johnson
being the first. As Lyman E. Johnson was excommunicated from the church
at Far West in 1838, Brigham Young was President of the Twelve by
virtue of his seniority of ordination as well as by the choice of his
brethren. Indeed the choice of the brethren mentioned in the text can
only be regarded as an act recognizing the fact of his presidency by
virtue of his seniority of ordination. It may be of interest to remark
also, that at the time there was but one man in the quorum President
Young's senior by age, namely, John E. Page, born in 1799, and ordained
an Apostle in 1838.

3. Peter Melling was the first patriarch ordained in a foreign land,
that is, a foreign land from America where the latter-day dispensation
of the Gospel was opened. He was the son of Peter Melling, born in
Preston, England, on the 14th day of February, 1787. He was, therefore,
in his 64th year. He was evidently a man of great force of character,
for he proceeded at once with great diligence and ability to fulfill
the duties of his high office, all of which is evidenced by the record
of the Patriarchal blessings given under his hands, and now in the
Historian's office.

4. Ternate is a small island in the Moluccas, west of Jilolo, in the
Dutch East Indies.

{131}



CHAPTER VII.

First Foreign Periodical of the Church, "The Millennial Star"--The
Prophet Seeks Release from Secular Responsibilities.

_Sunday, May 17_.--Elders Young, Woodruff, and Richards held conference
with the Saints at Gadfield Elm Chapel.

[Sidenote: The Beacon Hill Conference.]

_Monday, 18_.--The above Elders met the brethren at Elder Kington's,
where they had a tea party, praying, singing, confirming, ordaining,
and about twenty were baptized; thus they continued their labors from
place to place, until Wednesday 20th, when they found themselves with
one accord on the top of "the Herefordshire Beacon," [1] and within
the old fortification, when after prayer they expressed their feelings
concerning the business of the Church, which were (as they had obtained
money from Brother John Benbow, and other brethren for printing
the hymnbook, and in part sufficient for the Book of Mormon) that
Elder Young repair immediately to Manchester, and join his brethren
previously appointed with him on a committee, for the printing of the
hymn-book, and cause 3,000 copies to be issued without delay. Also
that the same committee cause 3,000 copies of the Book of Mormon to
be printed and completed with as little delay as possible, with an
index affixed to the same, the form of the book to be determined by
the committee. Their views were written and signed by Elder Willard
Richards and Wilford Woodruff, when President Young left direct for
Manchester. He saw George A. Smith, at the Potteries, who approved the
"Beacon Conference."

{132} _Sunday, 24_.--President Young met with the Church, and on
Monday, 25th, visited the printers to inquire their prices, etc.

    _A Letter of Heber C. Kimball, et al., Recommending English Saints
    to the Bishop of the Church_.

    Preston, May 25, 1840.

    To the Presidency, High Council and Bishop of the Church of Jesus
    Christ of Latter-day Saints at Commerce. We commend to your notice
    the brethren and sisters that have commendatory letters from us of
    this date, that you will do all that you consistently can for them,
    for I verily believe they have utmost confidence in you, and will
    receive with gratitude your advice and instruction, and cheerfully
    submit to the rules and regulations of the Church. They have our
    blessings, and we trust their subsequent conduct will entitle them
    to your blessings also, and the Church generally. We rejoice that
    we can say the work of God here is in a prosperous way. Yea, we
    rejoice greatly at the aspect of the times, expecting the time to
    be not far distant when the standard of truth will be conspicuously
    raised throughout this land. We have witnessed the flowing of the
    Saints towards Zion; the stream has begun, and we expect to see
    it continue running until it shall have drained the salt, or the
    light, from Babylon, when we hope to shout hosanna home.

    Dear brethren, accept our love, and present it to the Church.

    Your brethren in the new and everlasting covenant,

    Heber C. Kimball,

    Joseph Fielding,

    William Clayton.

_Tuesday, 26_.--Elder John Taylor arrived at Manchester, and on the
27th, Elder Kimball arrived. The committee on the hymn-book commenced
and continued selecting hymns until the 30th, when Elders Young,
Kimball and Taylor went to Liverpool, and preached on Sunday the 31st.

[Sidenote: Death of Bishop Partridge.]

_Wednesday, 27_.--Bishop Edward Partridge [2] died at Nauvoo, aged
forty-six years. He lost his life in consequence of the Missouri
persecutions, and he is one of that number whose blood will be required
at their hands. His daughter, Harriet Pamela, died on the 16th of May,
aged nineteen years.

{133} [Sidenote: First Number of the _Millenial Star_.]

The first number of _The Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star_ [3] was
issued at Manchester, in pamphlet form of twenty-four pages. Edited by
Parley P. Pratt. Price sixpence. Office 149 Oldham Road.

_Monday, June 1, 1840_.--The Saints have already erected about two
hundred and fifty-houses at Nauvoo, mostly block houses, a few framed,
and many more are in course of construction.

The Gospel is spreading through the States, Canada, England, Scotland,
and other places, with great rapidity.

{134} Elders Young and Kimball were engaged in blessing the brethren
who were about to sail for America.

_Wednesday, 3._--Elders Young and Taylor visited the printers in
Liverpool and Elder Young preached on the Sunday following.

The First Company of Saints from England.

_Saturday, 6._--Elder John Moon and a company of forty Saints, to
wit., Hugh Moon, his mother and seven others of her family, Henry Moon
(uncle of John Moon), Henry Moon, Francis Moon, William Sutton, William
Sitgraves, Richard Eaves, Thomas Moss, Henry Moore, Nancy Ashworth,
Richard Ainscough, and families, sailed in the ship _Britannia_ from
Liverpool for New York, being the first Saints that have sailed from
England for Zion.

_Monday, 8_.--Elders Young and Taylor visited Cheshire, and on Tuesday,
Manchester, and continued to select hymns.

[Sidenote: Brigham Young's Dreams.]

Elder Young dreamed of his family in health and want, also of the
Church and people, and of a contention between two small companies in
the west, one north, the other south--the north prevailing from time to
time.

    _Minutes of the Conference Held at Gadfield Elm Chapel, in
    Worcestershire, England, June 14th, 1840_.

    The preachers and members of the Bran Green and Gadfield Elm Branch
    of the Froomes Hill Circuit, of the United Brethren met at the
    Gadfield Elm Chapel, Worcestershire, June 14th, 1840, pursuant to
    previous notice, when the meeting was called to order by Elder
    Thomas Kington. Elder Willard Richards was chosen president, and
    Elder Daniel Browett clerk for the meeting. The meeting was opened
    by prayer by Elder Wilford Woodruff. Remarks were then made by the
    president respecting the business of the day, and the necessary
    changes which must take place.

    It was then moved by Elder Thomas Kington, seconded by Elder Daniel
    Browett that this meeting be hereafter known by the name of the
    "Bran Green and Gadfield Elm Conference of the Church of Jesus
    Christ of Latter-day Saints," organized and established by the will
    and commandment of God in the United States of America, on the 6th
    day of April, {135} A. D. 1830, this being the eighth day of the
    third month of the eleventh year of the rise of the Church. Carried
    unanimously.

    [This motion was permitted to accommodate the feelings of the
    conference, who had all recently been baptized, but there is no
    such principle in existence, as to transform a church or conference
    of the world into a church or conference of Christ's fold by vote.]
    [4]

    Moved by Elder Wilford Woodruff, seconded by Elder T. Kington,
    that William Jenkins be ordained an Elder; and William Coleman,
    Joseph Firkins, William Pitt and Robert Harris be ordained to the
    office of Priest; and that George Burton, James Palmer, and William
    Loveridge, be ordained Teachers; carried unanimously. Ordained
    under the hands of Elders Richards and Woodruff.

    Moved by Elder Kington, seconded by Elder Woodruff, that Robert
    Clift, Priest, have the care of the church at Dymock; James
    Palmer, Priest, have the care of the church at Kilcott; John Hill,
    Priest, have the care of the church at Twigworth; William Coleman,
    Priest, have the care of the church at Bran Green; Thomas Brooks,
    Priest, have the care of the church at Ryton; John Smith, Priest,
    have the care of the church at Lime Street; Charles Hayes, Priest
    have the care of the church at Deerhurst; Thomas Smith, Priest,
    Assistant, have the care of the church at Deerhurst; John Vernon,
    Priest, have the care of the church at Apperley; William Bayliss,
    Priest, Assistant, have the care of the church at Apperley; John
    Arlick, Priest, have the care of the church at Norton; John Spires,
    Priest, have the care of the church at Leigh; John Davis, Priest,
    assistant, have the care of the church at Leigh; Thomas Oakley,
    Priest, have the care of the church at Gadfield Elm.

    And that Elder Daniel Browett take charge of the churches on the
    south, and Elder William Jenkins on the north side, of the river
    Severn. Carried unanimously.

    Moved by Elder Woodruff, and seconded by Elder Richards, that Elder
    Thomas Kington be the Presiding Elder over the Conference; carried.
    Meeting adjourned until two o'clock.

    Conference met at two o'clock according to adjournment, and
    administered the sacrament to a large congregation of Saints,
    accompanied by many observations on many subjects by the President.
    Ten members were confirmed under the hands of Elders Woodruff
    and Kington. Remarks were made by the President respecting the
    "blessing of children." Seven children were then blessed under the
    hands of Elders Woodruff and Kington.

    {136} Moved by Elder Kington, seconded by Elder Woodruff, that
    Elder Daniel Browett represent this Conference to the general
    conference, at Manchester, on the 6th day of July next; carried.
    Moved and carried that the Clerk present to the Presiding Elder, T.
    Kington, also to the general conference, for safe keeping, a copy
    of the minutes of this conference.

    The above minutes were then read and adopted, article by article,
    when it was moved by the President, and seconded by Elder Woodruff,
    that this conference be adjourned to the 13th day of September next
    at this place; carried unanimously.

    Conference closed by prayer; after which the Elders and officers
    present met in council, and voted unanimously to establish a weekly
    council of the officers of said conference to be held alternately
    on the south and north sides of the river Severn, to commence at
    Leigh on the 25th inst.; and organized the same by appointing Elder
    Daniel Browett, president and John Hill, Priest, clerk, on the
    south side of the river; and also on the north side, by appointing
    Elder William Jenkins, president and John Smith, Priest, clerk; to
    assemble on the 3rd of July next, at Turkey Hall.

    After passing many other votes of minor importance, accompanied by
    much instruction from Elders Richards and Woodruff, touching the
    duties of the several officers in their relations to each other,
    and the Church, the council adjourned. And it is worthy of remark,
    that no dissenting vote or voice was seen or heard during the day,
    either in conference or council.

    Willard Richards, President.

    Daniel Browett, Clerk.

    _Memorial of Joseph Smith, Jun., to the High Council of the Church
    of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, June 18th, 1840_.

    The Memorial of Joseph Smith, Jun., respectfully represents--That
    after the members of the Church of Jesus Christ had been inhumanly
    as well as unconstitutionally expelled from their homes which they
    had secured to themselves in the state of Missouri, and although
    very much scattered and at considerable distance from each other,
    they found a resting place in the state of Illinois:--That after
    the escape of your Memorialist from his enemies, he (under the
    direction of the authorities of the Church) took such steps as
    has secured to the Church the present locations, viz., the town
    plot of Nauvoo and lands in the Iowa territory:--That in order to
    secure said locations, your Memorialist had to become responsible
    for the payment of the same, and had to use considerable exertion
    in order to commence a settlement, and a place of gathering for
    the Saints; and knowing from the genius of the {137} constitution
    of the Church, and for the well-being of the Saints, that it was
    necessary that the constituted authorities of the Church might
    assemble together to act or to legislate for the good of the whole
    society and that the Saints might enjoy those privileges which
    they could not enjoy by being scattered so widely apart--your
    Memorialist was induced to exert himself to the utmost in order to
    bring about objects so necessary and so desirable to the Saints at
    large:--Under the then existing circumstances, your Memorialist had
    necessarily to engage in the temporalities of the Church, which he
    has had to attend to until the present time:--That your Memorialist
    feels it a duty which he owes to God, as well as to the Church, to
    give his attention more particularly to those things connected with
    the spiritual welfare of the Saints, (which have now become a great
    people,) so that they may be built up in their most holy faith, and
    go on to perfection:--That the Church have erected an office where
    he can attend to the affairs of the Church without distraction,
    he thinks, and verily believes, that the time has now come, when
    he should devote himself exclusively to those things which relate
    to the spiritualities of the Church, and commence the work of
    translating the Egyptian records, the Bible, and wait upon the
    Lord for such revelations as may be suited to the conditions and
    circumstances of the Church. And in order that he may be enabled to
    attend to those things, he prays your honorable body will relieve
    him from the anxiety and trouble necessarily attendant on business
    transactions, by appointing some one to take charge of the city
    plot, and attend to the business transactions which have heretofore
    rested upon your Memorialist: That should your Honors deem it
    proper to do so, your Memorialist would respectfully suggest that
    he would have no means of support whatever, and therefore would
    request that some one might be appointed to see that all his
    necessary wants may be provided for, as well as sufficient means or
    appropriations for a clerk or clerks, which he may require to aid
    him in his important work.

    Your Memorialist would further represent, that as Elder H. G.
    Sherwood is conversant with the affairs of the city plot, he would
    be a suitable person to act as clerk in that business, and attend
    to the disposing of the remaining lots, &c.

    Your Memorialist would take this opportunity of congratulating your
    honorable body on the peace and harmony which exist in the Church,
    and for the good feelings which seem to be manifested by all the
    Saints, and hopes that inasmuch as we devote ourselves for the good
    of the Church, and the spread of the kingdom, that the choicest
    blessings of heaven will be poured upon us, and that the glory of
    the Lord will overshadow the inheritances of the Saints.

    Joseph Smith, Jun.

    {138} _Proceedings of the High Council on the Foregoing Memorial,
    June 20th, 1840_.

    The Council relieved President Joseph Smith, Jun., according to
    his request in the memorial, and appointed H. G. Sherwood to take
    charge of the city plot and to act as clerk in that business, and
    also to attend to the disposing of the remaining lots, and the
    business transactions which have rested upon him [Joseph Smith].
    Alanson Ripley was appointed steward to see that all the necessary
    wants of the First Presidency be supplied, as well as to provide
    sufficient means or appropriations for a clerk or clerks to aid
    President Joseph Smith, Jun., in his important work.

    Hosea Stout, Clerk.

    _Minutes of the Conference held at Stanley Hill, Castle Froome,
    Herefordshire, England, June 21st, 1840_.

    The preachers and members of the Froome's Hill Circuit of the
    United Brethren met at the house of Elder John Cheese, on Stanley
    Hill, Herefordshire, England, June 21, A. D. 1840, at ten a. m.,
    according to previous notice; the meeting was called to order by
    Elder Thomas Kington; Elder Wilford Woodruff was chosen president,
    and Elder John Benbow, clerk of the meeting.

    After prayer by Elder Richards, and remarks by the president
    concerning the business of the day, it was moved by Elder Thomas
    Kington, and seconded by Elder John Benbow, that [the several
    districts represented at] this meeting be hereafter known by the
    name of the "Froome's Hill Conference of the Church of Jesus Christ
    of Latter-day Saints," organized and established by the will and
    commandment of God, in the United States of America, on the 6th day
    of April, 1830, this being the 15th day of the third month of the
    eleventh year of the rise of the Church. Carried unanimously.

    Moved by Elder Richards, seconded by Elder Kington, that Thomas
    Clark, Charles Price, James Hill, and Samuel Jones be ordained
    Elders; also that John James, Joseph Skinn, Henry Jones, James
    Baldwin, John Morgan, Samuel Badham, and John Dyer, be ordained
    Priests; also that Robert Hill, George Brooks, James Skinn, and
    James Watkins be ordained Teachers; carried unanimously; and they
    were ordained under the hands of Elders Woodruff and Richards.

    Moved by Elder Kington, and seconded by Elders Woodruff and
    Richards, that John James, Priest, have the care of the church at
    Froome's Hill; John Parry, Priest, have the care of the church at
    Stanley Hill; James Burns, Priest, have the care of the church
    at Ridgway Cross; William Possons, Priest, have the care of the
    church at Moor-end Cross; Jonathan Lucy, Priest, have the care of
    the church at Caldwell; Thomas Jones, Priest, have the care of the
    church at Pale House; John Preece, {139} Priest, have the care of
    the church at Ledbury; Samuel Warren, Priest, have the care of the
    church at Keysend Street; James Baldwin, Priest, have the care of
    the church at Wind Point; George Allen, Priest, have the care of
    the church at Woferwood Common.

    Rough Leasow, Birchwood, Tunbridge, and Dunsclose will all be
    united in one branch, called Dunsclose.

    Samuel Badham, Priest, to have the care of the church at Dunsclose;
    Edward Phillips, Priest, to have care of the church at Ashfield
    and Crowcut; John Meeks, Priest, to have care of the church at
    Old Starridge; John Galley, Priest, to have care of the church at
    Hope Rough; Benj. Williams, Priest, to have care of the church at
    Shucknell Hill; John Powell, Priest, to have care of the church
    at Lugwardine; John Dyer, Priest, to have care of the church at
    Marden; William Evans, Priest, to have care of the church at Stokes
    Lane; John Fidoe, Priest, to have care of the church at Bishop
    Froome. Carried unanimously.

    Moved by Elder Richards, and seconded by Elder Kington, that
    Elder Thomas Clark have charge of the churches at Dunsclose, Old
    Starridge, Ashfield, and Crowcut; that Elder Samuel Jones have
    charge of the churches at Keys-end Street, Wind Point, Colwell,
    Pale House, and Malvern Hill; that Elder Philip Green have charge
    of the churches at Shucknall Hill, Lugwardine, and Marden; that
    Elder John Cheese have charge of the churches at Stokes Lane,
    Woferwood Common, and Bishop Froome; that Elder Charles Price have
    charge of the churches at Ledbury, Moor-end Cross, and Ridgway
    Cross; that Elder James Hill have charge of the churches at Hope
    Rough and Stanley Hill; that Elder John Benbow have charge of the
    church at Froome's Hill. Carried unanimously.

    Moved by the president, seconded by Elder Richards, that Elder
    Thomas Kington be the Presiding Elder over this conference.

    After remarks by the president, the meeting adjourned till 2
    o'clock p. m. During the recess ten persons were baptized.

    Assembled at 2 o'clock according to adjournment, and administered
    the sacrament to several hundred Saints; after which twenty were
    confirmed, and twenty children blessed under the hands of Elders
    Woodruff and Richards, accompanied with instructions by the
    president, explanatory of the ordinance.

    Moved by Elder Richards, seconded by the president, that Elder
    Thomas Kington represent this Conference to the general conference
    at Manchester on the 6th of July; carried. Moved and carried that
    the clerk of the conference present to the Presiding Elder, T.
    Lington, a copy of the minutes of this conference for safe keeping;
    also a copy to present to the general conference at Manchester.
    The minutes were then read and accepted. The president, followed
    by Elder Richards, then {140} proceeded to give such instruction
    to the Saints concerning the order of the Church, and the several
    duties of the members, as the Spirit directed; and bore testimony
    to the multitude of the truth of the work; followed by Elder
    Kington; when it was moved by Elder Richards, seconded by the
    president, that this conference adjourn to the 21st September next,
    10 o'clock a. m., at this place; carried.

    After prayer and singing, the assembly dispersed, the Elders and
    officers went into council, when it was moved by Elder Richards,
    and seconded by Elder Kington, that we proceed to establish
    and organize monthly councils of the officers of the Froome's
    Hill Conference, to commence on Friday, the 3rd of July next,
    at half-past seven o'clock p. m., in the several divisions,
    respectively assigned to the different Elders, viz.--

    Elder Thomas Clark, president, and James Meeks, clerk, Dunsclose;
    Elder Charles Price, president, Thomas Jenkins, clerk, Moor-end
    Cross; Samuel Jones, president, William Williams, clerk, Wind
    Point; James Hill, president, Joseph Pullen, clerk, Stanley Hill;
    Philip Green, president, Francis Burnett, clerk, Lugwardine; John
    Benbow, president, John Morgan, clerk, Froome's Hill; John Cheese,
    president, George Allen, clerk, Stoke's Lane. Carried.

    Moved by Elder Richards, and seconded by Elder Kington, that a
    monthly general council of the officers of this conference be held
    at Stanley Hill, to commence on Friday, the 17th of July next, at
    half-past seven o'clock, p. m. Elder Thomas Kington, president, and
    Elder John Benbow, clerk. Carried unanimously.

    The president then proceeded to explain the nature of the
    Priesthood, and the duties and privileges of the several officers,
    and gave such instruction as their situation required, followed by
    Elder Richards, who explained many important principles connected
    with the building up of the Kingdom.

    The minutes of the council were then read and accepted when the
    council adjourned; and after singing "The Spirit of God," &c., the
    brethren separated, with feelings of gratitude and thanksgiving,
    that God had been with His people, and that the spirit of union and
    love had prevailed in all the deliberations of the day.

    Wilford Woodruff, President.

    John Benbow, Clerk.

    Remarks--The different branches in this region are so scattered,
    that it has not been possible to ascertain the number of members
    connected with each individual church; but connected with the Bran
    Green and Gadfield Elm, and the Froome's Hill conferences, together
    with a small branch of Little Garway of twelve members, one Priest,
    and one Teacher, are thirty-three churches, five hundred and {141}
    thirty-four members, seventy-five officers, viz., ten Elders,
    fifty-two priests, and thirteen teachers. And for the comforting of
    the Saints, and with heart-felt gratitude to our heavenly Father,
    we would say that it is less than four months since the fulness of
    the Gospel was first preached in this region; which is a proof that
    God is beginning to make a short work in these last days.

    Wilford Woodruff.

[Sidenote: Carpenter's Hall.]

_June 21_.--The Saints hired the Carpenters' Hall in Manchester, which
is large enough to accommodate ten or fifteen hundred hearers, for five
hundred dollars a year, payable by contribution, and Elders Young and
Pratt preached therein this day for the first time.

_Monday, 22_.--Elder Young went to Liverpool to see about printing the
Book of Mormon, and returned to Manchester on the 26th; and on Sunday,
28th, preached in Carpenters' Hall.

_June 27_.--High Council met at my office.

    _Minutes of the High Council_.

    Alanson Ripley states to the council that he was authorized to
    inform them that President Joseph Smith, Jun., had vetoed [5] the
    proceedings of the Council of the 20th June, in relation to his
    Memorial. Laid over for hearing until Friday next.

    Hosea Stout, Clerk.

    _Letter of William W. Phelps--Confessing Errors committed in
    Missouri_.

    Dayton, Ohio, June 29, 1840.

    Brother Joseph--I am alive, and with the help of God I mean to live
    still. I am as the prodigal son, though I never doubt or disbelieve
    the fulness of the Gospel. I have been greatly abused and humbled,
    and I blessed the God of Israel when I lately read your prophetic
    blessing on my head, as follows:

    "The Lord will chasten him because he taketh honor to himself, and
    when his soul is greatly humbled he will forsake the evil. Then
    shall {142} the light of the Lord break upon him as at noonday and
    in him shall be no darkness," &c.

    I have seen the folly of my way, and I tremble at the gulf I have
    passed. So it is, and why I know not. I prayed and God answered,
    but what could I do? Says I, "I will repent and live, and ask my
    old brethren to forgive me, and though they chasten me to death,
    yet I will die with them, for their God is my God. The least place
    with them is enough for me, yea, it is bigger and better than all
    Babylon." Then I dreamed that I was in a large house with many
    mansions, with you and Hyrum and Sidney, and when it was said,
    "Supper must be made ready," by one of the cooks, I saw no meat,
    but you said there was pleanty, and you showed me much, and as good
    as I ever saw; and while cutting to cook, your heart and mine beat
    within us, and we took each other's hand and cried for joy, and I
    awoke and took courage.

    I know my situation, you know it, and God knows it, and I want to
    be saved if my friends will help me. Like the captain that was cast
    away on a desert island; when he got off he went to sea again, and
    made his fortune the next time, so let my lot be. I have done wrong
    and I am sorry. The beam is in my own eye. I have not walked along
    with my friends according to my holy anointing. I ask forgiveness
    in the name of Jesus Christ of all the Saints, for I will do
    right, God helping me. I want your fellowship; if you cannot grant
    that, grant me your peace and friendship, for we are brethren, and
    our communion used to be sweet, and whenever the Lord brings us
    together again, I will make ail the satisfaction on every point
    that Saints or God can require. Amen. [6]

    W. W. Phelps.

    _Letter of Elders Orson Hyde and John E. Page to Presidents Joseph
    Smith, Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Pleading for William W. Phelps_.

    Dear Brother:--We have been in this place a few days, and have
    preached faithfully, a very great prospect of some able and
    influential men embracing the faith in this place. We have moved
    along slowly, but have left a sealing testimony. Baptized a
    considerable number. We shall write again more particularly as soon
    as we learn the result of our labors here. We are well and in good
    spirits through the favor of the Lord.

    Brother Phelps requests us to write a few lines in his letter, and
    we cheerfully embrace the opportunity. Brother Phelps says he wants
    to {143} live, but we do not feel ourselves authorized to act upon
    his case, but have recommended him to you; but he says his poverty
    will not allow him to visit you in person, at this time, and we
    think he tells the truth. We therefore advise him to write, which
    he has done.

    He tells us verbally that he is willing to make any sacrifice to
    procure your fellowship, life not excepted, yet reposing that
    confidence in your magnanimity that you will take no advantage of
    this open and frank confession. If he can obtain your fellowship he
    wants to come to Commerce as soon as he can. But if he cannot be
    received into the fellowship of the Church, he must do the best he
    can in banishment and exile.

    Brethren, with you are the keys of the Kingdom; to you is power
    given to "exert your clemency, or display your vengeance." By
    the former you will save a soul from death, and hide a multitude
    of sins; by the latter, you will forever discourage a returning
    prodigal cause sorrow without benefit, pain without pleasure, [and
    the] ending [of Brother Phelps] in wretchedness and despair. But
    former experience teaches [us] that you are workmen in the art of
    saving souls; therefore with greater confidence do we recommend
    to your clemency and favorable consideration, the author [of the
    foregoing] and subject of this communication. "Whosoever will, let
    him take of the waters of life freely." Brother Phelps says he
    will, and so far as we are concerned we say he may.

    In the bonds of the covenant,

    Orson Hyde,

    John E. Page.

The Committee of the Twelve in England finished the collection of hymns
and prepared the index for the press; and on the 30th Elders Kimball
and Richards arrived at Manchester.

_Wednesday, July 1, 1840_.--Elders Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith
arrived at Manchester from the Potteries.

_July 2_.

    _Minutes of a meeting of the Crooked Creek Branch of the Church_.

    At a meeting of the Saints of Crooked Creek Branch, on the 2nd of
    July, 1840, to take into consideration the propriety of having a
    Stake of Zion appointed or located somewhere in the bounds of this
    branch, Brother John Hicks was called to the chair. Meeting was
    opened by prayer, after which several remarks were made, and the
    following resolutions were passed:

    {144} _Resolved_: That it be our wishes that a Stake of Zion be
    appointed or located within the bounds of this Branch, provided it
    should meet the minds of the First Presidency of this Church.

    _Resolved_: That a committee of three be appointed to ascertain the
    mind of the First Presidency and report to the Branch.

    _Resolved_: That Joseph Holebrook, Nathaniel Frampton, and John
    Hicks compose said committee.

    It was ascertained that there were about 2,525 acres of land owned
    by the brethren, and wherever the Stake should be appointed the
    lands should be donated or purchased for a very small compensation,
    and that there are one hundred and twelve members belonging to this
    Branch.

    _Resolved_: That we meet on Thursday next, at one o'clock, p. m.,
    to receive the report of the committee,

    _Resolved_: That the proceedings of this meeting be signed by the
    president and clerk.

    John A. Hicks, President.

    William Whiteman, Clerk.

_Friday, 3_.--High Council met at my office.

    _Minutes of High Council at Nauvoo_.

    The subject of the Memorial of President Joseph Smith, Jun., was
    brought up for a rehearing, according to the decision of the last
    Council (June 27) when the following resolutions were entered into:

    1st. _Resolved_: That we feel perfectly satisfied with the course
    taken by Joseph Smith, Jun., and feel a disposition, as far as
    it is in our power, to assist him, so as to relieve him from
    the temporalities of the Church, in order that he may devote
    his time more particularly to the spiritualities of the same,
    believing by so doing we shall promote the good of the whole
    Church. But as he (Joseph Smith, Jun.) is held responsible for
    the payment of the city plot, and knowing no way to relieve him
    from the responsibility at present, we would request of him to
    act as treasurer for the city plot and to whom [i. e., President
    Smith] those persons whom we may appoint to make sales of lots
    and attend to the business affairs of the Church may at all times
    be responsible, and make true and correct returns of all their
    proceedings, as well as to account for all monies, properties,
    etc., which may come into their hands. Therefore

    _Resolved_: That Elder Henry G. Sherwood act as Clerk for the same.
    That Bishop Alanson Ripley be appointed to provide for the wants of
    the Presidency, and make such appropriations to them, and to their
    clerk or clerks, which they may require.

    _Resolved_: That the funds of the city plot shall not be taken
    to provide for the Presidency or clerks, but that the Bishops be
    instructed to {145} raise funds from other sources to meet calls
    made on them; and monies received for lots shall be deposited in
    the hands of the Treasurer to liquidate the debts of the city plot.

    The resolutions of the Crooked Creek Branch of the 2nd inst., were
    taken into consideration by President Joseph Smith, Jun., and it
    was thought proper to establish a Stake on Crooked Creek, agreeably
    to the request of said Branch, and a letter was written to the
    brethren to that effect.

    Robert B. Thompson, Scribe.

[Sidenote: Reflections of the Prophet on the Action of Congress.]

Since Congress has decided against us, the Lord has begun to vex this
nation, and He will continue to do so except they repent; for they
now stand guilty of murder, robbery and plunder, as a nation, because
they have refused to protect their citizens, and to execute justice
according to their own Constitution. A hailstorm has visited South
Carolina; some of the stones are said to have measured nine inches in
circumference, which swept the crops, killing some cattle. Insects are
devouring crops on the high lands, where the floods of the country have
not reached, and great commercial distress prevails everywhere.

Footnotes:

1. One of the noted heights of the Black Mountains, running through the
west part of Herefordshire.

2. See Biographical Note, Vol. I, pp. 128-9.

3. The _Millennial Star_ was the first foreign publication of the
Church. It was issued as a monthly, but afterwards more frequently,
semi-monthly, and finally, and now for many years, a weekly. Its
publication has been continuous from the time it was started until
the present--1907. Also the _Star_ has retained the general character
imparted to it by its first publishers. "The _Millennial Star_,"
said its Prospectus, "will stand aloof from the common political
and commercial news of the day. Its columns will be devoted to the
spread of the fulness of the Gospel--the restoration of the ancient
principles of Christianity--the gathering of Israel--the rolling forth
of the kingdom of God among the nations--the signs of the times--the
fulfillment of prophecy--recording the judgments of God as they befall
the nations whether signs in the heavens or in the earth, blood fire
or vapor of smoke--in short, whatever is shown forth indicative of the
coming of the 'Son of Man' and ushering in of his universal reign upon
the earth. It will also contain letters from our numerous Elders who
are abroad, preaching the word both in America and Europe containing
news of their success in ministering the blessings of the glorious
Gospel."

As an explanation of its title and mission, the editor in its first
number also said:

"The word _Millennium_ signifies a thousand years, and in this sense
of the word, may be applied to any [period of a] thousand years,
whether under the reign of wickedness or righteousness. But the term
_the Millennium_, is generally understood to apply to the particular
thousand years which is mentioned in the Scriptures as the reign of
peace--the great sabbath of creation, of which all the other sabbaths
or jubilees seem to be but types. It is written that a 'thousand years
is as one day, and one day as a thousand years with the Lord.' This
being the case, then seven thousand years are seven days with the Lord,
and the seventh, or last thousand years would, of course, be a sabbath
or jubilee; a rest, a grand release from servitude and woe. * * * The
curse will be taken from off the earth, and it will cease to bring
forth thorns and thistles, and become fertile as it were a paradise,
while sickness, premature death, and all their attendant train of pains
and sorrows will scarce be known upon its face; thus peace, and joy,
and truth, and love, and knowledge, and plenty, and glory, will cover
the face of the earth as the waters do the sea. The tabernacle of God
and his sanctuary will be with man, in the midst of the holy cities;
and joy and gladness will all the measure of their cup. Such then, is
the _Great Millennium_ of which our little '_Star_' would fain announce
the dawn."

4. The matter in brackets occurs in the Ms. History as also in the
History as published in the _Millennial Star_, but it is evidently the
comment of the Church Historians.

5. By reference to the minutes of the High Council which took into
consideration the Prophet's "Memorial" it is evident that they failed
to grasp the importance of the subjects presented to them, and made
such disposition of them as was neither in keeping with the dignity of
the Prophet or the weight of the matters on which they acted--hence the
"veto," or dissatisfaction with the council's action--See p. 144 for
the conclusion of the matter.

6. For William W. Phelps' troubles in the church, which brought him to
this great sorrow and repentance, see Vol. III, pp. 3, 7, 56, 358, 359,
360 and notes.

{146}



CHAPTER VIII.

Important Conference of the Church in England--Kidnapping of Brown and
Boyce by Missourians--Action of the Citizens of Nauvoo.

_Monday, July 6, 1840_.

    _Conference of the Church in England_.

    A General Conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
    Saints was held in the Carpenter's Hall, Manchester, on the 6th
    day of July, 1840, it being the 1st day of the 4th month of the
    eleventh year of the Church, when the following officers of the
    traveling High Council were present, viz.: Elders Brigham Young,
    Parley P. Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, Willard Richards,
    Heber C. Kimball, and George A. Smith; other officers, viz.: High
    Priests 5, Elders 19, Priests 15, Teachers 11, and Deacons 3.

    The meeting being called to order, a little after ten o'clock,
    by Elder William Clayton, it was moved by Elder Brigham Young,
    seconded by Elder Wilford Woodruff, that Elder Parley P. Pratt
    be chosen President of the conference, [1] which was carried
    unanimously. Elder William {147} Clayton was chosen clerk. The
    meeting was opened by singing, and prayer by the President.

    Elder Brigham Young then proceeded to prefer charges against
    Elder T. Green, viz., first, for giving way to a false spirit;
    second, for abusing a young female, by accusing her, in a public
    meeting, of things which he could not prove; and third, for abuse
    to the house and congregation at Duckinfield, June 28th, 1840. The
    president then proceeded to ask Elder Green whether he was guilty
    of these charges, or not. He immediately pleaded guilty. After
    Elder Young had made extended remarks to the meeting, touching the
    conduct of Elder Green, he proposed that Elder Green go to those
    characters where he had abused and insulted, and make confession to
    them as far as the offense extended, and then to be suspended from
    office for a season. The President then made remarks to the same
    effect, and put it to the vote of the meeting, viz., that Elder
    Green shall make confession, as stated above, and be suspended from
    office for a season. Carried.

    The President then asked Elder Green if he was willing to make
    confession, he immediately agreed to do it the first opportunity.
    The meeting adjourned a little after twelve o'clock.

    At two o'clock business commenced by singing and prayer, when the
    President called upon the officers to represent the different
    branches of the Church, which was done in the following order,
    viz.--

    {148}

     Branches Represented, &c.                                           Members. Elders. Priests. Teachers. Deacons.
     The Branch at Manchester Represented by Elder William Clayton       28       3       5        5         1
     The Branch at Preston represented by Elder Joseph Fielding          354      6       8        4         2
     Elders Kington and Browett presented the minutes of the conference
     held in Herefordshire, which were read by Elder Wilford Woodruff,
     representing 33 branches of the Church                              534      10      52       13
     Elder Alfred Cordon read the minutes of the conference held at
     Hanley, Staffordshire, representing 7 branches of the Church        168      4       13       6         2
     The branch at Liverpool, represented by Elder John Taylor           78       1       3        2
     Elder Joseph Fielding read the minutes of the Thornley, represented
     represented by Elder William Kay                                    30       3       2        1         1
     The Branch at Ribchester, represented by Elder Francis Clark        22       2                1
     The Branch at Waddington, represented by John Ellison               58               2        2         1
     The Branch at Clitheroe, represented by Brother Lofthouse           35       1       3        1
     The Branch at Chatburn, represented by Elder John Bond              91       2       2        2
     The Branch at Downham, represented by John Spencer                  25               1
     The Branch at Grindleton, represented by Elder Joseph Fielding      5                1
     The Branch at Whitmore, represented by J. Spencer                   3
     The Branch at Burnley, represented by Elder H. C. Kimball           27       1       1        1
     The Branch at Blackburn, represented by Elder H. C. Kimball         17               1
     Elder Reuben Hedlock read the minutes of the conference held at
     Paisley, Scotland, representing 5 branches of the Church            106      6       5        3         2
     The Branch at Alston, represented by Elder John Sanders             36       2       2        2
     The Branch at Brampton, represented by Elder John Sanders           36       1       1
     The Branch at Longton, represented by Elder Bradshaw                54       2       4        2
     The Branch at Penworthan, represented by Elder P. Melling           77       4       1        1         1
     The Branch at Whittle, represented by Elder Richard Withnall        16       1       4
     The Branch at Southport, represented by R. McBride                  19       1                2
     The Branch at Daubers Lane & Eccleston, Represented by Elder
     Richard Withnall                                                    42               1        3
     The Branch at Hunter's Hill, represented by Richard Benson          26       1       1        1
     The Branch at Bolton, represented by Elder David Wilding            61       1       2        2
     The Branch at Bury and Elton, represented by Elder David Wilding    12
     The Branch at Ratcliff, represented by Elder Amos Fielding          11
     The Branch at Benford, &c. represented by Elder Willard Richards    40       1       1
     The Branch at Stockport, represented by Elder M. Littlewood         85       2       1        2         1
     The Branch at Duckinfield, represented by Elder Henry Royle         41       1       1
     The Branch at Macclesfield, represented by Samuel Heath             14               2
     The Branch at Middlewich, represented by Samuel Heath               20               1        1         1
     The Brach at Plover, represented by Samuel Heath                    24               1        1         1
     The Branch at Northwich, represented by William Berry               14               1
     The Branch at Altrincham, represented by William Berry              4                         1
     The Branch at Whitfield, represented by Walker Johnson              14               1
     The Branch at Pendlebury, represented by Elder William Clayton      13               1        1
     The Branch at Eccles, represented by Elder William Clayton          5
     The Branch at West Bromwich, represented by Elder Theodore Turley   16               1        1

    After the officers had got through the representations, the
    President introduced the new hymn-book; and after suitable remarks
    had been made by him and Elders Young and Thomas Kington, the
    President asked the conference if they were satisfied with the
    labors of those who had made the selection, and if they received
    the book. The unanimous approbation of the meeting was immediately
    manifested.

    By unanimous vote, Thomas Kington, Alfred Cordon, and Thomas Smith
    were ordained High Priests; John Albison, John Blezzard, William
    Berry, John Sanders, John Parkinson, James Worsley, and John Allen
    were ordained Elders; and Joseph Slinger, George Walker, John
    Smith, Robert Williams, William Black, John Melling, and John
    Swindlehurst were ordained Priests.

    Elder Brigham Young then called upon those officers, whose
    circumstances would permit them to devote themselves entirely to
    the work of the ministry, and would volunteer so to do, to stand
    up--when the following names were taken, viz., of the traveling
    High Council, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, John Taylor, Wilford
    Woodruff, Willard Richards, and George A. Smith; other officers,
    namely, William Clayton, Reuben Hedlock, Hiram Clark, Theodore
    Turley, Joseph Fielding, Thomas Richardson, Amos Fielding, John
    Parkinson, John Wych, John Needham, Henry Royle, John Blezzard, D.
    Wilding, Charles Price, Joseph Knowles, Wm. Kay, Samuel Heath, Wm.
    Parr, R. McBride, and James Morgan.

    {149} Moved by Elder Richards, seconded by Elder Kimball, that
    Elder Peter Melling be appointed to preside over the following
    branches of the Church, namely--Preston, Longton, Penwortham, North
    Meols, and Southport; carried.

    Moved by Elder Kimball, seconded by Elder Young, that Elder Richard
    Withnall be appointed to preside over the branches of the Church
    at Whittle, Daubers Lane, Chorley, Hunter's Hill, and Euxtonburgh;
    carried.

    Moved by Elder Kimball, seconded by Elder Young, that Elder Thomas
    Smith be appointed to preside over the branches of the Church at
    Clitheroe, Chatburn, Downham, Chaighley, Grindleton, Whitmore,
    Burnley, Blackburn, Ribchester, and Thornley: carried.

    Moved and seconded, that President Fielding and his counselors
    be set at liberty from the charge which they have sustained as a
    presidency, that they may have the privilege of more fully entering
    into the field of labor; and that their labors be accepted; carried.

    Elders Young and Richards then proceeded to ordain those who had
    been nominated to their respective offices, after which the minutes
    were read and accepted.

    The conference adjourned to the sixth of October next, to be held
    in the Carpenter's Hall, Manchester, at 10 o'clock, a. m.

_Tuesday, 7_.

    _A council of Church Officers, held at Manchester, England_.

    Pursuant to previous notice, a general council of the Church
    officers was held in the council room at the _Star_ office,
    Manchester, on the 7th day of July, 1840. The meeting being opened
    by prayer by Elder Kimball, Elder Young began to speak concerning
    those officers who had volunteered to devote themselves wholly to
    the ministry; when it was moved and seconded that Brothers William
    Kay and Thomas Richardson go to Herefordshire, to labor in that
    region with Elder Kington; carried.

    Moved by Elder Kimball, seconded by Elder Young, that Brothers
    Hiram Clark and Joseph Knowles go with Elder Hedlock to Scotland:
    carried.

    Moved by Elder Kimball, seconded by Elder Young, that Brother
    Joseph Fielding go to Bedford: carried.

    Moved by Elder Richards, seconded by Elder Kimball, that Brothers
    Amos Fielding and John Wych go to Newcastle-upon-Tyne: carried.

    Moved by Elder Kimball, seconded by Elder Woodruff, that Brother
    David Wilding go to Garway, Herefordshire: carried.

    Moved by Elder Young, seconded by Elder Woodruff, that Brothers
    William Clayton and John Needham go to Birmingham: carried.

    {150} Moved by Elder Richards, seconded by Elder Young, that
    Brother Henry Royle go to Sheffield: carried.

    Moved by Elder Clayton, seconded by Elder Young, that Brother John
    Albiston take charge of the following Branches of the Church,
    namely--Duckinfield, Hyde, Woolley Hill, Ashton, and Staley Bridge:
    carried.

    Moved by Elder Pratt, seconded by Elder Woodruff, that Brother
    William Parr go to Sandbach and Congleton: carried.

    Moved by Elder Richards, seconded by Elder Pratt, that Brother
    Heath continue his labors in Macclesfield: carried.

    Moved by Elder Richards, seconded by Elder Woodruff, that Brother
    John Blezzard go to Cornshaw: carried.

    Moved by Elder Kimball, seconded by Elder Richards, that Brother
    Robert McBride go to Lancaster: carried.

    Moved by Elder Richards, seconded by Elder Woodruff, that Brother
    James Morgan abide in his own neighborhood to labor with Elder
    David Wilding: carried.

    Moved by Elder Pratt, seconded by Elder Woodruff, that Brother
    Price give up his business, and labor under the advice of Elder
    Kington as the way opens: carried.

    Moved by Elder Richards, seconded by Elder Kimball, that Brother
    William Black go to Lisburn, Ireland, as the way opens: carried.

    Moved by Elder Richards, seconded by Elder Smith, that Brother John
    Parkinson have a roving commission, so long as he keeps busy, and
    doing good: carried.

    After Elder Young had addressed the meeting upon several important
    items, the meeting dismissed by blessing from Elder Young.

    Parley P. Pratt, President.

    William Clayton, Clerk.

At this time Elders Orson Hyde and John E. Page were laboring in Ohio.

_Thursday, 9_.

    _Extract from Elder Woodruff's Letter to the Editor of the
    _Millennial Star_--Detailing Incidents of his Ministry_.

    I arrived at Froome's Hill, Castle Froome, Herefordshire, on the
    4th of March, and was kindly entertained for the night by Mr.
    John Benbow, who received my testimony, and opened his door for
    meeting; and on the evening following, the 5th of March, for the
    first time I preached the fullness of the Gospel in that place to
    a small congregation, who manifested much interest in what they
    heard, and desired to inquire further into those things; and on
    the evening following I met a large {151} number at Mr. Benbow's,
    and preached unto them the principles of the Gospel, namely, faith
    in Christ, repentance, and baptism for the remission of sins and
    the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands; after which
    I administered the ordinance of baptism unto six persons, Mr. and
    Mrs. Benbow among the number. I also preached on Sunday the 8th
    and baptized seven, confirmed thirteen, and broke bread unto them.
    Several of those who were baptized were preachers of the order
    called the United Brethren.

    The United Brethren formerly belonged to the Primitive Methodists,
    but had separated themselves from the body, and chose the name of
    the United Brethren. They had from forty to fifty preachers and
    about the same number of established places of meeting, including
    two chapels.

    Mr. Thomas Kington was the superintendent of the church of the
    United Brethren, whose members numbered about four hundred in all,
    divided into small branches and scattered over an extent of country
    from fifteen to twenty miles. This people almost universally
    appeared willing to give heed to the exhortation of Solomon, to
    hear a matter before they judged or condemned. They opened their
    doors for me to preach, and searched the Scriptures daily to see if
    the things which I taught were true; and on finding that the word
    and spirit agreed and bore record of the truth of the fullness of
    the Everlasting Gospel, they embraced it with all their hearts,
    which has brought great joy and satisfaction to many souls in that
    region.

    I continued preaching and baptizing daily; the congregations were
    large and generally attentive. I was soon privileged with an
    interview with Mr. Thomas Kington, the superintendent of the United
    Brethren, before whom I gave an account of the rise and progress
    of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, and bore testimony of the
    truth of the great work which God had set His hand to accomplish in
    these last days.

    Mr. Kington received my testimony and sayings with candor; and
    carried the case before the Lord, made it a subject of prayer, and
    asked the Father in the name of Jesus Christ, if these things were
    true; and the Lord manifested the truth of it unto him, and he went
    forth and was baptized, he and all his household. I ordained him an
    Elder, and he went forth and began to preach the fullness of the
    Gospel.

    I also baptized about forty preachers of the same order, and
    several others belonging unto other churches, and about one hundred
    and twenty members of the United Brethren, which opened about forty
    doors or preaching places, where the fullness of the Gospel would
    meet a welcome reception, and all this during the term of one month
    and five days.

    On the 10th of April I took my departure from the Saints in
    Herefordshire and adjoining country, numbering about one hundred
    and sixty; {152} whom I left rejoicing in the fullness of the
    Gospel, and hundreds of others who were ready to be baptized as
    soon as a proper time and opportunity arrived. I arrived in Preston
    on the 13th, by way of Worcester, Wolverhampton, Burslem, and
    Manchester, a distance of about one hundred and seventy miles,
    visiting the churches by the way.

    On my arrival in Preston, I was blessed with the happy privilege of
    once more greeting my brethren of the Traveling High Council and
    other Elders, and of sitting with them on the 14th, 15th, and 16th
    of April in the first council and general conference which they had
    ever held, as a quorum, in a foreign nation. After spending several
    days together, (during which time much business of importance was
    transacted for the Church,) it became necessary for us again to
    separate in order to labor in different parts of the vineyard which
    were now open before us. I left Preston on the 17th, accompanied
    by Elder Brigham Young, and visited the churches by the way, until
    we arrived among the Saints in Herefordshire, who were anxiously
    looking for my return. In a few days we were joined in our labors
    by Elder Willard Richards. We took locations in different parts of
    this new field of labor, which extended through various places in
    Herefordshire, Worcestershire, and Gloucestershire.

    We continued preaching, and baptizing, and administering in the
    ordinances of the Gospel daily, unto such as would receive our
    testimony, and obey the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Truth was mighty
    and prevailed; the work prospered, and multiplied on every hand,
    until several hundreds, including more than fifty preachers of
    various sects, were rejoicing in the fullness of the everlasting
    Gospel, and felt to praise God that they had lived to behold the
    day when the Lord had set His hand to prune His vineyard once
    more with a mighty pruning, and to establish the Gospel in its
    ancient purity again upon the face of the earth; and in many
    instances signs followed the believer, according to the promise
    of the Savior. The Spirit of God accompanied the preaching of the
    word to the hearts of men. Whole households, on hearing the word,
    have received it into good and honest hearts, and gone forth and
    received the ordinances of the Gospel; and frequently we have
    baptized from eight to twelve the first time of meeting with the
    people in new places, and preaching the word of God to them.

    Elder Young labored with us about one month, during which time
    many were baptized, confirmed, and numbers ordained to preach the
    Gospel--and while the Saints were much edified, and their hearts
    made glad with the teaching and instruction by Elder Young, I also
    obtained much benefit myself by enjoying his society, sitting under
    his instruction, and sharing in his counsel.

    As it became necessary for Elder Young to return to Manchester,
    to {153} assist in preparing a collection of hymns, and other
    matters, he took the parting hand with us on the 20th of May; and
    Elders Richards and myself continued our labors in the vineyard, in
    connection with Elder Kington, who had given himself wholly to the
    work of the ministry.

    The Lord still continued to bless our labors, and added daily unto
    the Church. New doors were opening on every hand; and multiplicity
    of calls constantly reached our ears, many of which we could not
    answer for the want of laborers. Notwithstanding there were about
    fifty ordained Elders and Priests in this part of the vineyard, yet
    there were equally as many places for preaching to be attended to
    upon the Sabbath day. Thus we continued our labors in this region
    until the time drew near for the general conference in Manchester
    on the 6th of July.

    But before leaving the Saints, we considered it wisdom to set in
    order the church, and organize them into branches and conferences,
    that they might be properly represented before the general
    conference. Therefore we held two conferences with the Saints
    before we took our departure from them. The first was held at the
    Gadfield Elm Chapel, Worcestershire, on the 14th of June, at which
    time we organized twelve branches, and transacted such business as
    the occasion required. The Second conference was held at Stanley
    Hill, Herefordshire, on the 21st of June, twenty branches of the
    Church were organized. The minutes of the above-named conferences I
    present you for publication, if you think proper.

    On the day following, Elder Richards and myself took our leave of
    the Saints at Froome's Hill, Herefordshire; but before leaving we
    repaired to a pool three times to baptize and confirm numbers that
    came to us and requested these ordinances at our hands.

    Elder Richards labored in this part of the vineyard about two
    months, during which time he traveled extensively, preached night
    and day, gave much instruction to the Saints generally, and had
    many souls as seals to his ministry. I received much benefit from
    the counsel which he gave in the organization of the churches, and
    it was manifest that he had passed through a profitable school of
    experience during the three years of his travels in England; and
    the interesting seasons we have enjoyed together during these two
    months, will not be easily erased from my memory.

    It was with no ordinary fellings that we took our departure from
    the Saints in Herefordshire on this occasion; for, less than
    four months since, I proclaimed the fullness of the Gospel in
    this region for the first time; but now, we were leaving between
    five and six hundred Saints, who were rejoicing in the new and
    everlasting covenant, and hundreds of others who were wishing to
    hear and obey. I parted from Elder Richards at Birmingham, who went
    direct to Manchester, while I visited {154} West Bromwich, and
    preached several times to a small branch of the Church which had
    been raised up in that place by Elder Turley, who baptized several
    while I was there. I also attended a conference on the 29th June,
    at Hanley, in the Staffordshire Potteries, in company with Elder
    George A. Smith and others, after which I arrived in Manchester.

    Wilford Woodruff.

    Manchester, July 9, 1840.

[Sidenote: Special Instructions for the High Councils.]

_Saturday, 11_.--The High Council met at my office, when I taught
them principles relating to their duty as a Council, and that they
might be guided by the same in future, I ordered it to be recorded as
follows: "That the Council should try no case without both parties
being present, or having had an opportunity to be present; neither
should they hear one person's complaint before his case is brought up
for trial; neither should they suffer the character of any one to be
exposed before the High Council without the person being present and
ready to defend him or herself; that the minds of the councilors be not
prejudiced for or against any one whose case they may possibly have to
act upon."

[Sidenote: The First Missionary for Australia.]

William Barrett, aged 17, was ordained an Elder in Hanley,
Staffordshire, England, by Elders George A. Smith and Alfred Cordon,
and took leave for South Australia, being the first Elder who went on a
mission to that country.

_Sunday, 12_--Elias Smith was appointed Bishop by the High Council of
Iowa, in place of Alanson Ripley, removed to Nauvoo.

_Monday, 13_.

    _Kidnapping of Alanson Brown and Benjamin Boyce--Affidavit of
    Daniel H. Wells_. [2]

    State Of Illinois, Hancock County.

    This day personally appeared before the undersigned, an acting
    justice of the peace, in the aforesaid county, Alanson Brown,
    who, first {155} being duly sworn according to law, deposes and
    says, that on the 7th day of July, A. D. 1840, and in the county
    of Hancock, in said state, William Allensworth, H. M. Woodyard,
    William Martin, John H. Owsley, John Bain, Light T. Tait, and
    Halsay White, in company with several other persons, to this
    affiant unknown, forcibly arrested this affiant, and one Benjamin
    Boyce, whilst affiant and said Boyce, were quietly pursuing their
    own lawful business; and that immediately after said arrest, the
    said Allensworth, Woodyard, Martin, Owsley, Bain, Tait, and White,
    did illegally and forcibly take, kidnap, and carry this affiant and
    said Boyce, bound with cords, from the said county of Hancock, in
    said state, on the day and year above set forth, in the county of
    Lewis, in the state of Missouri, without having established a claim
    for such a procedure, according to the laws of the United States.

    Affiant states that in a short time after he was taken into the
    state of Missouri, he was put into a room with said Boyce, and
    there kept until about eleven o'clock the following night; when
    they were taken out of the room where they had been confined, into
    the woods, near at hand, by said Tait, a man by the name of Huner,
    and another by the name of Monday, and some others, whose name
    affiant did not learn; they previously placed a rope about the
    neck of the affiant; Huner and Monday then proceeded to hang the
    affiant, and did hang him for some time upon a tree, until affiant
    was nearly strangled, after which they let him down and loosened
    the rope. Shortly after this, affiant heard repeated blows, which
    others--belonging to the same gang of Huner--were inflicting upon
    Boyce, and he could hear also the cries of Boyce, under the pain
    arising from the blows; after which affiant and Boyce were taken
    back to the room where they had been confined, in which they found
    a man by the name of Rogers, and another by the name of Allred.

    Affiant further states that he was kept in imprisonment by the
    {156} persons heretofore named, and others to him unknown, until
    Friday evening next ensuing the Tuesday on which Boyce and himself
    were kidnapped, when he escaped out of their hands and returned
    into the state of Illinois. Affiant had learned that the name of
    the place in said county of Lewis, state of Missouri, to which he
    was taken from the state of Illinois, is called Tully, to which the
    said Allensworth, Woodyard, Martin, Owsley, Bain, Tait and White,
    have fled as fugitives from justice, and at which they are now to
    be found.

    I hereby certify that the foregoing affidavit was this day
    subscribed and duly sworn to before me, by said Alanson Brown.

    Daniel H. Wells.

    Justice of the Peace, July 13, 1840.

    _Statement of James Allred_.

    State Of Illinois, Hancock County.

    This day personally appeared before the undersigned, an acting
    Justice of the Peace, in and for said county, James Allred, a
    credible witness, who first being duly sworn according to law,
    deposes and says that William Allensworth, John H. Owsley, and
    William Martin, on the 7th day of July, 1840, within the limits
    of said county of Hancock, aided by several other persons, to
    this affiant unknown, forcibly arrested this affiant and one Noah
    Rogers, whilst the affiant and said Rogers were peaceably pursuing
    their own lawful business; and that the said Allensworth, Owsley
    and Martin, after said arrest, aided by sundry persons, to affiant
    unknown, did forcibly take, kidnap and carry this affiant and said
    Rogers from the said county of Hancock in the state of Illinois,
    on the day and year above mentioned into the state of Missouri,
    without having established a claim for such procedure according to
    the laws of the United States.

    Affiant further states, that in a short time after he had been so
    taken into the state of Missouri, he was put into a room with said
    Rogers, and there kept until some time during the following night,
    when they were taken out of the room where they were confined,
    into the woods near by, and this affiant was bound by the persons
    conducting him, to a tree, he having been first forcibly stripped
    by them of every particle of clothing. Those having him in charge
    then told affiant that they would whip him; one of them, by the
    name of Monday, saying to this affiant, "G--d--n you, I'll cut you
    to the hollow." They, however, at last unbound the affiant without
    whipping him.

    Affiant states that said Rogers was taken just beyond the place
    where affiant was bound with a rope around his neck, and he heard
    a great number of blows, which he then supposed, and has since
    learned were inflicted upon said Rogers, and heard him cry out
    several times as if in great agony; after which affiant, together
    with Rogers, was taken {157} back and placed in the room from which
    they were taken, together with one Boyce and Brown, and detained
    until Monday next succeeding the day on which he was kidnapped; at
    which time he received from one of the company, who had imprisoned
    him, a passport, of which the following is a copy--

    "Tully, Missouri, July 12, 1840. The people of Tully, having
    taken up Mr. Allred, with some others, and having examined into
    the offenses committed, find nothing to justify his detention any
    longer, and have released him. By order of the committee.

    "H. M. Woodward."

    And then this affiant was permitted to return home into the state
    of Illinois. This place in Missouri, to which affiant and said
    Rogers were taken, he has learned is called Tully, and is situated
    in the county of Lewis, and at which place the said Allensworth,
    Owsley and Martin are now living.

    I hereby certify that the forgoing affidavit was this day
    subscribed, and duly sworn to before me, by the said James Allred.

    Daniel H. Wells,

    Justice of the Peace.

    _Action of the Citizens of Nauvoo in the Matter of the Kidnapping
    of Brown and Boyce by the Missourians_.

    At a meeting of the citizens of Nauvoo, Hancock county, Illinois,
    13th July, 1840, Judge Elias Higbee was called to the chair, and
    Robert B. Thompson was appointed Secretary.

    On motion a committee was appointed to report resolutions,
    expressive of the sense of this meeting, consisting of the
    following persons, to wit.--Isaac Galland, Robert B. Thompson,
    Sidney Rigdon, and Daniel H. Wells, who retired, and after a short
    absence, reported the following preamble and resolutions, which
    were unanimously adopted--

    _Report of the Committee on Resolutions_.

    Preamble--The committee appointed to express the sense of this
    meeting, in relation to the recent acts of abduction, and other
    deeds of cruelty and inhumanity committed upon our citizens
    by [some of] the citizens of the state of Missouri, beg leave
    respectfully to report:

    That having under consideration the principal matters involve in
    the discharge of their duty, they have been forced to arrive at the
    following conclusions:

    First--That the people of Missouri, not having sufficiently slacked
    their thirst for blood and plunder, are now disposed to pursue us
    with a repetition of the scenes of brutality which marked their
    whole course of conduct towards us during our unhappy residence
    among them.

    {158} Second--That notwithstanding they have already robbed us
    of our homes, murdered our families, stolen and carried away our
    property; and to complete the measure of their infamy as a state,
    their executive caused unoffending thousands to be banished from
    the state, without even the form of a trial, or the slightest
    evidence of crime; they are now sending their gangs of murdering
    banditti, and thieving brigands, to wreak further vengeance, and
    satisfy their insatiable cupidity in the state of Illinois, and
    that too before we have even had time to erect shelters for our
    families.

    Third--That for the purpose of giving a semblance of justification
    to their most unhallowed conduct, the people of Missouri have again
    commenced concealing goods within the limits of our settlements, as
    they had done before in the state of Missouri, in order to raise a
    charge of stealing against our citizens, and under this guise they
    have within a few days kidnapped, and carried away, several honest
    and worthy citizens of this county.

    Fourth--Under these circumstances the first duty and the only
    redress which seems to offer itself to our consideration is an
    appeal to the executive of the state of Illinois, for redress, and
    protection from further injuries, with a confident assurance that
    he, unlike the governor of Missouri, will extend the executive arm
    to protect from lawless outrage, unoffending citizens. Therefore,

    _Resolved 1st_: That we view, with no ordinary feelings, the
    approaching danger as a necessary consequence following the lawless
    and outrageous conduct of the citizens of Missouri, in setting
    at defiance the laws of this, as well as of all other states in
    this Union, by forcing from their homes, and from the state, civil
    citizens of Illinois, and taking them into the state of Missouri,
    without any legal process whatever, and there inflicting upon them
    base cruelties in order to extort false confessions from them, to
    give a coloring to their (the Missourians') iniquities, and screen
    themselves from the just indignation of an incensed public.

    _Resolved 2ndly_: That while we deeply deplore the cause which
    has brought us together on this occasion, we cannot refrain from
    expressing our most unqualified disapprobation at the infringement
    of the laws of this state, as set forth in the above Preamble, and
    strongest indignation at the manner in which the people of Missouri
    treated those whom they had thus inhumanly taken from among us.

    _Resolved 3rdly_: That inasmuch as we are conscious of our honest
    and upright intentions, and are at all times ready and willing
    to submit to the just requirements of the laws, we claim of the
    citizens and authorities of this state, protection from such unjust
    and, before, unheard of oppressions.

    {159} _Resolved 4thly_: That the forcible abduction of our citizens
    by the citizens of Missouri, is a violation of the laws regulating
    the federal compact, subversive to the rights of freemen, and
    contrary to our free institutions, and republican principles.

    _Resolved, 5thly_: That the cruelties practiced upon our citizens,
    since their abduction, is disgraceful to humanity; the height of
    injustice and oppression, and would disgrace the annals of the most
    barbarous nations, in either ancient or modern times; and can only
    find its parallel in the "_Auto da Fe_"--the inquisitions in Spain.

    _Resolved, 6thly_: That such unconstitutional and unhallowed
    proceedings on the part of the citizens of Missouri, ought to
    arouse every patriot to exertion and diligence to put a stop to
    such procedure, and use all constitutional means to bring the
    offenders to justice.

    _Resolved, 7thly_: That we memorialize the Executive of this state,
    of the gross outrage which has been committed on our citizens;
    and pledge ourselves to aid him in such measures as may be deemed
    necessary to restore our citizens to freedom, and have satisfaction
    for the wrongs we have suffered.

    Elias Higbee, Chairman,

    R. B. Thompson, Secretary.

    _Memorial to Governor Carlin_.

    _To his Excellency Governor Carlin_:--The undersigned being a
    committee to draft a Memorial to your Excellency relative to the
    recent outrages, would respectfully represent; that after being
    driven from our homes, and pleasant places of abode, in the state
    of Missouri, by the authorities of said state, Illinois seemed to
    be the first shelter or asylum which presented itself to our view;
    that having left the state of Missouri, your memorialists found
    an asylum in the state of Illinois; and notwithstanding the false
    reports which were circulated to our prejudice, we were received
    with kindness by the noble hearted citizens of Illinois; who
    relieved our necessities, and bade us welcome; for which kindness
    we feel thankful.

    That under your Excellency's administration, we have had every
    encouragement given us, and have every reason, from the kindness
    and sympathy which you have ever manifested towards us in our
    sufferings, to feel confident that your aid will ever be offered
    to us in common with the rest of the citizens of the state. That
    feeling ourselves so happy and secure, and beginning again to
    enjoy the comforts of life, we are sorry to say that our quiet has
    been disturbed, our fears alarmed, and our families annoyed by
    the citizens of Missouri; who, with malice and hatred, which is
    characteristic of them, have unconstitutionally sent an armed force
    and abducted some of our friends, namely, James Allred, {160} Noah
    Rogers, Alanson Brown, and one Boyce, and carried them into the
    state of Missouri, and treated them with the greatest barbarity
    and cruelty; even now their wives and children, as well as their
    friends, are alarmed for the safety of their lives.

    Therefore we have felt it our duty to place the circumstances of
    this unheard-of outrage before you, and appeal to your Excellency
    for protection from such marauders, and take such measures as you
    may deem proper, that our friends may be again restored to the
    bosom of their families, and the offenders punished for their
    crimes.

    We have the greatest confidence in your Excellency, that every
    constitutional means will be resorted to, to restore our friends to
    the society of their families, &c., that we, in common with other
    citizens of the state of Illinois, may enjoy all the rights and
    privileges of freemen.

    Your memorialists have under all circumstances paid the greatest
    respect to the laws of the country, and if any should break the
    same, they have never felt a disposition to screen such from
    justice, but when under false pretenses, to gratify and satiate
    a revengeful disposition--for the citizens of another state,
    regardless of both the laws of God and man, to come and kidnap our
    friends, to carry off our citizens to cruelly treat our brethren;
    such offenders, we think, should be brought to an account, to be
    dealt with according to their merit or demerit; that we may enjoy
    the privileges guaranteed to us by the Constitution of the United
    States.

    We therefore humbly pray that your Excellency will satisfy yourself
    of the gross outrage which has been committed on the citizens of
    the state, and with that energy which is so characteristic of your
    Excellency's administration, take such steps as you may deem best
    calculated to repair the injuries which your memorialists have
    sustained; that you will vindicate the injured laws of the state.

    In conclusion, we beg leave to assure your Excellency, that in the
    discharge of this, as well as every other constitutional movement,
    you may rely upon the hearty co-operation of your memorialists,
    who respectfully submit to your Excellency the accompanying
    Resolutions, which were passed at a large meeting held in this
    place on this day, and also the affidavit of one of those persons
    who was kidnapped, but fortunately has made his escape.

Footnotes:

1. At the present time the above arrangement by which Elder Parley
P. Pratt was chosen president of the conference, while Elder Brigham
Young was his senior in the quorum of the Twelve Apostles, will seem
somewhat out of order. Such procedure is recorded a number of times
in the minutes of conferences and other gatherings in the early years
of the Church's history; it is therefore proper to say that in those
days the right to presidency by reason of seniority of standing in
quorums and councils was not as well settled as it is now. Presidency
throughout the councils and quorums of the church is determined by well
settled principles of seniority of ordination, and as soon as any of
these organizations are called to order for business the president of
the council or conference is determined by the seniority of standing
in said organization without any formal action. In the above case the
brethren may have been influenced by the fact that Elder Pratt was an
older member of the church than President Young. Also, it appears in
a subsequent paragraph that some charges were preferred by President
Young against one of the Elders in the conference. This course may have
been decided upon by the Apostles, who probably thought that it would
not be best for the presiding officer over the conference to make such
charges, hence Elder Pratt was chosen to preside and Elder Young left
free to make the charges aforesaid.

2. Daniel Hanmer Wells was the son of Daniel Wells by his second wife
Catherine Chapin. He was born at Trenton, Oneida county, New York,
October 27, 1814. His father was a descendant of Thomas Wells, the
fourth governor of Connecticut, while his mother was descended from
David Chapin, a veteran of the Revolution, who served under Washington,
and was a descendant of one of the oldest and most distinguished
families of New England. The father of Daniel H. Wells died when the
son was but 12 years old, which threw upon him, at this early age, the
care of his mother and younger sister. At the age of 16 he migrated
with his mother and sister to Marietta, Ohio, where Daniel H. taught
school during the winter, and in the spring moved to Illinois, settling
at Commerce, where he made extensive purchases of land. One farm of
eighty acres was in the very heart of what became the city of Nauvoo,
in fact he platted his farm into city lots which he sold at very
reasonable prices to the Saints. The Temple site was selected from the
western range of blocks in this addition. In 1885 he married Eliza
Robison, and a son was born to them a year later. Mr. Wells served a
term as constable in the district in which Commerce was situated, and
was now a justice of the peace and familiarly called "Squire Wells."
He was a stalwart Whig in politics; a man of high character and great
courage.

{161}



CHAPTER IX.

The Return of a Prodigal--Conditions in Kirtland--Progress of the Work
in Great Britain--The Coming of John C. Bennett.

    Australian Mission.

    _Extract of a Letter from Elder William Barratt_.

    Deptford, [1] July 15, 1840.

    Dear Brother In Christ:--I write to inform you of my arrival in
    the metropolis this morning, after a tedious journey in the midst
    of much profaneness and swearing, such as I never heard in my
    life before. I feel, as the Apostle expresses it, like a lamb
    among wolves, going into a land of strangers to preach the Gospel;
    therefore I desire your prayers in my behalf. I have witnessed much
    of the spirit of revelation since Sunday; in fact, I only thought
    it a mere thought, when the Elders testified that they were called
    by revelation; but now I know the truth of the assertion, which
    proves to me who ought to preach, and that none ought, without they
    are called by revelation.

    Give my love to all the Saints, and tell them that as many as
    remain faithful I will meet in Zion, bringing my sheaves with me.
    Tell them my faith is fixed, and my resolution is strong to meet
    you all there, whom I love in the Lord. Pray that a door may be
    opened, and that a gift of utterance may be given unto me in a
    foreign land to preach the Gospel. Brethren, sorrow not for me, as
    those that have no hope, for we have a hope of living and eating
    together in the kingdom of our God.

_Friday, 17_.--By my suggestion, High Council voted that Samuel Bent
and George W. Harris go on a mission to procure money for printing
certain books.

_Saturday, 18_.--Elias Smith was ordained a Bishop.

_Sunday, 19_.--An answer to Brigham Young's letter of the 17th of May
was sent by Lorenzo Snow, [2] which gave {162} the Twelve permission to
publish the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and hymn-book, but
not to ordain any into the quorum of the Seventies; and likewise some
general instructions.

_Monday, 20_.--Elder John Moon and company arrived in New York being
the first arrival of Saints in America.

_Wednesday, 22_.

    _The Prophet's Letter to William W. Phelps--Welcoming him back into
    the Church_. [3]

    Nauvoo, Hancock County, Illinois, July 22, 1840.

    Dear Brother Phelps:--I must say that it is with no ordinary
    feelings I endeavor to write a few lines to you in answer to yours
    of the 29th ultimo; at the same time I am rejoiced at the privilege
    granted me.

    {163} You may in some measure realize what my feelings, as well
    as Elder Rigdon's and Brother Hyrum's were, when we read your
    letter--truly our hearts were melted into tenderness and compassion
    when we ascertained your resolves, &c. I can assure you I feel a
    disposition to act on your case in a manner that will meet the
    approbation of Jehovah' (whose servant I am), and agreeable to the
    principles of truth and righteousness which have been revealed;
    and inasmuch as long-suffering, patience, and mercy have ever
    characterized the dealings of our heavenly Father towards the
    humble and penitent, I feel disposed to copy the example, cherish
    the same principles, and by so doing be a savior of my fellow men.

    It is true, that we have suffered much in consequence of your
    behavior--the cup of gall, already full enough for mortals to
    drink, was indeed filled to overflowing when you turned against
    us. One with whom we had oft taken sweet counsel together, and
    enjoyed many refreshing seasons from the Lord--"had it been an
    enemy, we could have borne it." "In the day that thou stoodest on
    the other side, in the day when strangers carried away captive his
    forces, and foreigners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon
    [Far West], even thou wast as one of them; that thou shouldest not
    have looked on the day of thy brother, in the day that he became a
    stranger, neither shouldst thou have spoken proudly in the day of
    distress."

    However, the cup has been drunk, the will of our Father has been
    done, and we are yet alive, for which we thank the Lord. And having
    been delivered from the hands of wicked men by the mercy of our
    God, we say it is your privilege to be delivered from the powers of
    the adversary, be brought into the liberty of God's dear children,
    and again take your stand among the Saints of the Most High, and by
    diligence, humility, and love unfeigned, commend yourself to our
    God, and your God, and to the Church of Jesus Christ.

    Believing your confession to be real, and your repentance genuine,
    I shall be happy once again to give you the right hand of
    fellowship, and rejoice over the returning prodigal.

    Your letter was read to the Saints last Sunday, and an expression
    of their feeling was taken, when it was unanimously

    {164} _Resolved_, That W. W. Phelps should be received into fellowship.

  "Come on, dear brother, since the war is past,
  For friends at first, are friends again at last."

    Yours as ever, Joseph Smith, Jun.

    _Credentials of Elders Samuel Bent and George W. Harris_.

    To all whom it may concern:--This is to certify that Elders Samuel
    Bent and George W. Harris are authorized agents of the Church of
    Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, being appointed by the First
    Presidency and High Council of said Church to visit the branches
    of the Church in the east, or wherever they may be led in the
    providence of God, to obtain donations and subscriptions for the
    purpose of printing the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants,
    hymn-books, the new translation of the Scriptures. They are
    likewise instructed and authorized to procure loans in behalf
    of the Church, for carrying into operation the above and other
    important works necessary to the well being of said Church.

    From our long acquaintance with these our beloved brethren, their
    long, tried friendship under circumstances the most trying and
    painful, their zeal for the cause of truth, and their strict
    morality and honesty we most cheerfully recommend them to the
    Saints of the Most High. Any statements they may make relative to
    their mission may be implicitly relied upon, and any loans which
    they may obtain, will be considered binding on the Church. And we
    do hope the Saints will do all in their power to effect the object
    proposed, and lift up the hands of our beloved brethren who have
    cheerfully come forward to engage in a work so great and important.

    Joseph Smith, Jun., President,

    William Marks,

    Elias Higbee,

    David Dort,

    Charles C. Rich,

    Seymour Brunson,

    William Huntington,

    Hyrum Smith,

    Newel Knight,

    Alpheus Cutler,

    Henry G. Sherwood,

    David Fullmer,

    Thomas Grover,

    Lewis D. Wilson.

    _The Prophet's Letter to Oliver Granger--Dealing Chiefly with
    Affairs at Kirtland_.

    _Brother Granger_:

    Dear Sir:--It was with great pleasure I received your and Brother
    Richards' letter, dated New York, June 23, 1840, and was very happy
    {165} to be informed of your safe arrival in that place, and your
    probability of success; and I do hope that your anticipations will
    be realized, and that you will be enabled to free the Lord's House
    from all incumbrances, and be prospered in all your undertakings
    for the benefit of the Church; and pray that while you are exerting
    your influence to bring about an object so desirable, that the
    choicest blessings of heaven may rest down upon you, while you are
    endeavoring to do so, and attending to the duties laid upon you by
    the authorities of the Church in this place.

    I am sorry to be informed not only in your letter, but from other
    respectable sources, of the strange conduct pursued in Kirtland by
    Elder Almon W. Babbitt. I am indeed surprised that a man having the
    experience which Brother Babbitt has had, should take any steps
    whatever, calculated to destroy the confidence of the brethren in
    the Presidency or any of the authorities of the Church.

    In order to conduct the affairs of the Kingdom in righteousness, it
    is all important that the most perfect harmony, kind feeling, good
    understanding, and confidence should exist in the hearts of all the
    brethren; and that true charity, love one towards another, should
    characterize all their proceedings. If there are any uncharitable
    feelings, any lack of confidence, then pride, arrogance and envy
    will soon be manifested; confusion must inevitably prevail, and
    the authorities of the Church set at naught; and under such
    circumstances, Kirtland cannot rise and free herself from the
    captivity in which she is held, and become a place of safety for
    the Saints, nor can the blessings of Jehovah rest upon her.

    If the Saints in Kirtland deem me unworthy of their prayers when
    they assemble together, and neglect to bear me up at the throne of
    heavenly grace, it is a strong and convincing proof to me that they
    have not the Spirit of God. If the revelations we have received
    are true, who is to lead the people? If the keys of the Kingdom
    have been committed to my hands, who shall open out the mysteries
    thereof?

    As long as my brethren stand by me and encourage me, I can combat
    the prejudices of the world, and can bear the contumely and abuse
    with joy; but when my brethren stand aloof, when they begin to
    faint, and endeavor to retard my progress and enterprise, then I
    feel to mourn, but am no less determined to prosecute my task,
    being confident that although my earthly friends may fail, and even
    turn against me, yet my Heavenly Father will bear me off triumphant.

    However, I hope that even in Kirtland there are some who do not
    make a man an offender for a word, but are disposed to stand forth
    in defense of righteousness and truth, and attend to every duty
    {166} enjoined upon them; and who will have wisdom to direct them
    against any movement or influence calculated to bring confusion and
    discord into the camp of Israel, and to discern between the spirit
    of truth and the spirit of error.

    It would be gratifying to my mind to see the Saints in Kirtland
    flourish, but think the time is not yet come; and I assure you it
    never will until a different order of things be established and
    a different spirit manifested. When confidence is restored, when
    pride shall fall, and every aspiring mind be clothed with humility
    as with a garment, and selfishness give place to benevolence and
    charity, and a united determination to live by every word which
    proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord is observable, then, and
    not till then, can peace, order and love prevail.

    It is in consequence of aspiring men that Kirtland has been
    forsaken. How frequently has your humble servant been envied in his
    office by such characters, who endeavored to raise themselves to
    power at his expense, and seeing it impossible to do so, resorted
    to foul slander and abuse, and other means to effect his overthrow.
    Such characters have ever been the first to cry out against the
    Presidency, and publish their faults and foibles to the four winds
    of heaven.

    I cannot forget the treatment I received in the house of my
    friends. These things continually roll across my mind, and cause
    me much sorrow of heart; and when I think that others who have
    lately come into the Church should be led to Kirtland instead of to
    this place, by Elder Babbitt; and having their confidence in the
    authorities lessened by such observations as he (Elder Babbitt) has
    thought proper to make, as well as hearing all the false reports
    and exaggerated accounts of our enemies--I must say that I feel
    grieved in spirit, and cannot tolerate such proceedings--neither
    will I; but will endeavor to disabuse the minds of the Saints, and
    break down all such unallowed proceedings.

    It was something new to me when I heard there had been secret
    meetings held in the Lord's House, and that some of my
    friends--faithful brethren--men enjoying the confidence of the
    Church, should be locked out. Such proceedings are not calculated
    to promote union, or peace, but to engender strife; and will be a
    curse instead of a blessing. To those who are young in the work, I
    know they are calculated to be, and must be, injurious. Those who
    have had experience, and who should know better than to reflect on
    their brethren--there is no excuse for them.

    If Brother Babbitt and the other brethren wish to reform the
    Church, and come out and make a stand against sin and speculation,
    &c., they must use other weapons than lies, or their object can
    never be effected; {167} and their labors will be given to the
    house of the stranger, rather than to the House of the Lord.

    The proceedings of Brother Babbitt were taken into consideration
    at a meeting of the Church at this place, when it was unanimously
    resolved, that fellowship should be withdrawn from him until
    he make satisfaction for the course he has pursued: of which
    circumstance I wish you to apprise him without delay, and demand
    his license.

    Dear sir, I wish you to stand in your lot, and keep the station
    which was given you by revelation and the authorities of the
    Church. Attend to the affairs of the Church with diligence, and
    then rest assured of the blessings of heaven. It is binding on
    you to act as president of the Church in Kirtland, until you are
    removed by the same authority which put you in; and I do hope there
    will be no cause for opposition, but that good feeling will be
    manifested in future by all the brethren.

    Brother Burdick's letter to Brother Hyrum was duly received, for
    which he has our best thanks; it was indeed an admirable letter,
    and worthy of its author. The sentiments expressed were in
    accordance with the spirit of the Gospel, and the principles are
    correct.

    I am glad that Brother Richards has continued with you, and hope he
    has been of some service to you. Give my love to him.

    Our prospects in this place continue good. Considerable numbers
    have come in this spring. There were some bickerings respecting
    your conduct soon after your departure, but they have all blown
    over, and I hope there will never be any occasion for any more;
    but that you will commend yourself to God and to the Saints by a
    virtuous walk and holy conversation.

    I had a letter from William W. Phelps a few days ago, informing
    me of his desire to come back to the Church, if we would accept
    of him. He appears very humble, and is willing to make every
    satisfaction that Saints or God may require.

    We expect to have an edition of the Book of Mormon printed by the
    first of September; it is now being stereotyped in Cincinnati.

    I am, &c., &c.,

    Joseph Smith, Jun.

[Sidenote: A Jew's Memorial.]

An interesting memorial concerning the Jews, "To the Protestant Powers
of Europe and America," signed and sealed in London the 8th of January,
1839, may be found in the _Millennial Star_, Vol. I, No. 6. [4]

{168} _Sunday, 24_.--Elder William Donaldson, member of the British
army bound for the East Indies, writes from Chatham, 24th of July, "We
go on board tomorrow. I have had a glorious vision about going into the
land of Egypt."

_Saturday, 25_.

    _Letter of John C. Bennett to Joseph Smith and Sidney
    Rigdon--Announcing His Intention to Join the Saints_.

    Fairfield, Illinois, July 25, 1840.

    Reverend and Dear Friends:--The last time I wrote you was during
    the pendency of your difficulties with the Missourians. You are
    aware that at that time I held the office of "Brigadier-General of
    the Invincible Dragoons" of this state, and proffered you my entire
    energies for your deliverance from a ruthless and savage, though
    cowardly foe; but the Lord came to your rescue, and saved you with
    a powerful arm. I am happy to find that you are now in a civilized
    land, and in the enjoyment of peace and happiness.

    Some months ago I resigned my office with an intention of removing
    to your town, and joining your people; but hitherto I have been
    prevented. I hope, however, to remove to Commerce, and unite with
    your Church next spring. I believe I should be much happier with
    you. I have many things to communicate which I would prefer doing
    orally; and I propose to meet you in Springfield on the first
    Monday in December next, as I shall be there at the time on state
    and United States business.

    If I remove to Commerce, I expect to follow my profession, and to
    that end I enclose you a slip from the _Louisville Journal_, to
    give you an idea of my professional standing.

    On the first of this month I was appointed to the office of {169}
    "Quartermaster-General of the State of Illinois," which office I
    expect to hold some years.

    I hope you are all quite well. In haste. Write me immediately.

    Yours respectfully,

    John C. Bennett. [5]

    To Messrs. Smith and Rigdon.

_Monday, 27_.

    _Letter of John C. Bennett to Messrs. Smith and Rigdon--Making
    Further Tender of his Services to the Church_.

    Quartermaster-General's Office,

    Fairfield, Illinois, July 27, 1840.

    _To the Reverends Sidney Rigdon and Joseph Smith, Jun_.:

    Respected Friends:--I wrote you a few days ago from this place, but
    my great desire to be with you and your people prompts me to write
    again at this time; and I hope it will not be considered obtrusive
    by friends whom I have always so highly esteemed as yourselves.

    At the last District and Circuit Court of the United States, holden
    at Springfield, in June last, I had the honor of being on the
    grand inquest of the United States for the District of Illinois,
    and hoped to have seen you there; but was quite disappointed. I
    attended the meeting of your people opposite Mr. Lowry's hotel, but
    did not make myself known, as I had no personal acquaintance in the
    congregation.

    It would be my deliberate advice to you to concentrate all of your
    Church at one point. If Hancock county, with Commerce for its
    commercial emporium, is to be that point, well; fix upon it, and
    let us cooperate with a general concerted action. You can rely upon
    me in any event. I am with you in spirit, and will be in person as
    soon as circumstances permit, and immediately if it is your desire.
    Wealth is no material object with me. I desire to be happy, and am
    fully satisfied that can enjoy myself better with your people, with
    my present views and feelings, than with any other. I hope that
    time will soon come when your people will become my people, and
    your God my God.

    At the time of your peril and bitter persecution in Missouri, you
    are {170} aware I proffered you my utmost energies, and had not
    the conflict terminated so speedily, I should have been with you
    then. God be thanked for your rescue from the hand of a savage, but
    cowardly foe!

    I do not expect to resign my office of "Quartermaster-General of
    the State of Illinois" in the event of my removal to Commerce,
    unless you advise otherwise. I shall likewise expect to practice
    my profession; but at the same time your people shall have all
    the benefit of my speaking powers, and my untiring energies in
    behalf of the good and holy faith. _Un necessariis unitas, in non
    necessariis libertas, in omnibus charitas_, [6] shall be my motto
    with--_Suaviter in modo, fortiter in re_. [7]

    Be so good as to inform me substantially of the population of
    Commerce and Hancock county, the face of the country, climate,
    soil, health, &c., &c. How many of your people are concentrated
    there? Please to write me in full immediately. Louisville paper
    will accompany this; please inquire for it.

    With sentiments of profound respect and esteem, suffer me to
    subscribe myself,

    Yours respectfully,

    John C. Bennett.

Elder John Taylor sailed for Ireland from Liverpool. [8]

_Tuesday, 28_.

    _Letter of the Prophet to Horace R. Hotchkiss--Rock River Lands and
    the White Purchase_.

    Nauvoo, July 28, 1840.

    _Horace R. Hotchkiss, Esq_.:

    Dear Sir:--I acknowledge the receipt of yours of last month,
    giving me the numbers of the land on Rock River, which you felt
    disposed to sell. In reply to which I have to say, that we have not
    yet examined the land, and consequently have not arrived at any
    conclusion {171} respecting it; but it is probable that some of my
    friends will visit it this fall, and if we should think it wisdom
    to locate there, or on the other tract, you will be informed of the
    same, and arrangements entered into.

    I am sorry that your health has been so poor, but hope, ere
    this, you are perfectly recovered. It would afford me great
    pleasure indeed, could I hold out any prospect of the two notes
    due next month being met at maturity, or even this fall. Having
    had considerable difficulty (necessarily consequent on a new
    settlement) to contend with, as well as poverty and considerable
    sickness, our first payment will be probably somewhat delayed,
    until we again get a good start in the world; and I am happy to
    say, the prospect is indeed favorable. Under these circumstances
    we shall have to claim your indulgence, which I have no doubt will
    be extended. However, every exertion on our part shall be made
    to meet the demands against us, so that if we cannot accomplish
    all we wish to, it will be our misfortune, and not our fault.
    Notwithstanding the impoverished condition of our people, and the
    adverse circumstances under which we have had to labor, I hope we
    shall eventually rise above them, and again enjoy the blessings of
    health, peace, and plenty.

    You were informed in a former letter that we had paid Mr. William
    White the one thousand dollars specified in your bond; a few days
    ago he called at this place and agreed to give us a deed for the
    ninety acres, (less one-half acre), providing I would give him an
    identifying bond, and pay the interest due from you to him on the
    one thousand dollars, which I agreed to do. I have therefore got
    the deed for the land, and paid him the interest. My reasons for
    so doing were these: there are some who wish to purchase lots,
    providing they can get a good title deed for the same, and who
    would be induced to make purchases and make an effort to raise
    money, for the sake of getting a deed; which effort they would not
    be so likely to make if we could only give them a bond. This I
    think will work both to your advantage and ours, and hope that we
    shall be able by and by to make some cash sales.

    I hope this arrangement with Mr. White will meet your approbation,
    although it is a departure from the common rules of business; but
    was induced to do so from the advantages which will result from it,
    which I hope will be mutual. The amount of interest paid to Mr.
    White, after deducting $61.50, which was coming from him to you
    for rents, was eighty-four dollars and forty cents. Mr. White told
    us that you agreed to pay him as much interest for the money as he
    could get elsewhere. We accordingly (in good faith) allowed him at
    the rate of ten per cent. Hoping the course pursued will meet your
    approbation.

    I am, respectfully, your obedient servant,

    Joseph Smith, Jun.

    {172} P. S.--You will recollect the verbal agreement entered into
    by us, that the notes for the interest would not be exacted for
    at least five years. Notwithstanding which, we use our endeavors
    to meet them as fast as possible, and think that when I have the
    pleasure of seeing you again, you will be fully satisfied with the
    course we have taken, and our endeavors to meet all our engagements.

    J. S., Jun.

_Thursday, 30_.

    _Letter of John C. Bennett to Messrs. Smith and Rigdon--Expressing
    Anxiety to be with the Saints_.

    Fairfield, Wayne County, Illinois, July 30th, 1840.

    _To Reverends Sidney Rigdon, and Joseph Smith, Jun_.

    Respected Friends:--It is with difficulty that I can forego the
    felicity of an immediate immersion into the true faith of your
    beloved people. I have written you several letters, and forwarded
    you several newspapers to Commerce, which I hope will be duly
    received, as they contain some matters of importance.

    Is Nauvoo, or Commerce, to be the general point of concentration
    for the Mormon people? For at that point I desire to locate, and
    ever remain. My anxiety to be with you is daily increasing, and I
    shall wind up my professional business immediately, and proceed to
    your blissful abode, if you think it best.

    Look at all my letters and papers and write me forthwith. You are
    aware that at the time of your most bitter persecutions, I was
    with you in feeling, and proffered you my military knowledge and
    prowess. My faith is still strong. I believe the God of the whole
    earth will avenge your wrong in time as well as in eternity.

    O my friends, go on and prosper; and may the God of all grace save
    you with an everlasting salvation.

    Yours respectfully,

    J. C. Bennett.

_Saturday, August 1_.--In the _Times and Seasons_ of this month I find
the following:

    _A voice from the holy city--rebuilding of the temple of
    Solomon--Recall of the people of God to the land of Judah_.

    We have received by the last packet from England, a copy of a
    very extraordinary "Circular" issued by the Jews, now residing
    at Jerusalem, and addressed to all the descendants of Abraham to
    the uttermost {173} ends of the earth. It is written in the pure
    Hebrew character, and accompanied with an English translation,
    which we annex as matter of the deepest curiosity to the people of
    this country. Next week, if we possibly can, we shall publish the
    original Hebrew in a double sheet, but at present we must content
    ourselves with the translation.--_Morning Herald_.

    Circular.

    "_To our Brethren the Israelites of Europe and America_:

    "The liberal and benevolent contributors towards every holy and
    pious purpose--ready to stand in the breach and evince their love
    for the Land of Promise: to the well-wishers of Jerusalem, and
    friends of Zion (dearer to us than life) who extend their bounteous
    aid to this Holy City, and devote their best means, in love and
    affection, 'to take pity on her stones, and show mercy to her
    dust.' To the illustrious and excellent Rabbies--to their worthy
    and distinguished Assessors--to the noble Chiefs and faithful
    Leaders of Israel; to all congregations devoted to the Lord, and
    to every member thereof--health, life, and prosperity. May the
    Lord vouchsafe His protection unto them; may they rejoice and be
    exceedingly glad; and with their own eyes may they behold when the
    Lord restoreth Zion. Such be His gracious will. Amen.

    "It is a fact well known throughout Judah and Israel, that 'the
    glory altogether departed from the daughter of Zion,' since upwards
    of one hundred years ago, the congregation of German Jews in this
    Holy City were forcibly deprived of their homes and inheritance.
    Dreadful and grievous was the yoke under which the despots of this
    land oppressed them. Tyranny and cruel usage ground them to the
    dust, and forced them to forsake their habitations, to abandon
    their houses and all their property, and to seek safety in flight.
    Thus the large court they inherited from their ancestors remained
    deserted and uninhabited, until it was seized upon and possessed by
    aliens. The sacred edifices it contained, namely, the Synagogue and
    Medrash, were by them demolished, the whole of the property utterly
    ruined, and possessions, lawfully ours, devastated before our eyes.
    Then did our souls refuse all consolation! For how could we bear to
    witness the evil which befell our people!

    "As the light gleams forth from a spark, so did our congregation
    take heart and return again to form their establishments, and to
    take root on the Holy Mount. But we could find no rest for our
    wearied feet--no place consecrated and appointed for our prayer and
    instruction. Our aching eyes beheld how every nation and tongue,
    even from the most distant isles of the ocean, is here possessed
    of structures defended by walls, gates, and portcullis, whilst the
    people of the Lord, forcibly {174} expelled from their inheritances
    by rapacious barbarians, were covered with obloquy, scorn, and
    disgrace.

    "The cries of the people ascended unto the Lord who dwelleth
    in Zion. He looked down, and in pity beheld their sufferings
    and oppression. And ever since the ruler of Egypt first assumed
    the government of the Holy Land--a ruler who maintains justice
    throughout his dominions--an edict was issued permitting Jews to
    do whatsoever they deemed right and expedient, with respect to
    the rebuilding of their demolished synagogues and colleges. Us,
    likewise, the Lord in His mercy vouchsafed to remember, and caused
    us to be reinstated into the heritage of our fathers, even to the
    aforementioned court, which is called the Ruin of R. Jehudah the
    Pious (of blessed memory).

    "Blessed be the Lord our God, the God of our fathers, who inspired
    the heart of the ruler of Egypt to restore unto us the possessions
    of our ancestors. Nor did we delay or lose time in the matter, but
    exerted ourselves to rebuild Jerusalem.

    "'We fenced it, and gathered up the stones thereof,' and the sacred
    undertaking prospered in our hands, so that we have completed the
    Medrash, and 'great is the glory of the house;' and also houses
    for the teachers of the law, and for the hospitable reception and
    entertainment of strangers, which were indispensably necessary
    to accommodate the many pious Israelites who visit the Holy City
    during the festivals. And on _Rosh Hodesh Shebath_ last we joyfully
    placed a Sepher Torah in the Medrash, which we consecrated by the
    name of '_Menahem Zion_,' for the Lord has vouchsafed to comfort
    His people.

    "But although we have thus, under the blessings of Providence,
    retrieved from devastation a part of the possessions bequeathed
    unto us by our pious ancestors, yet our hearts are afflicted and
    our eyes are dimmed when we behold the sanctuary of our Lord, the
    Synagogue, which still lies in ruins; nor is it in the power of all
    of us (the German Congregation) to rebuild it; for alas! great is
    the number of our poor who stand in need of bread, and the debts
    we contracted in building the Medrash are large, and weigh heavily
    upon us.

    "The cause of our grief is thus ever present to our eyes--the
    ruins of the Synagogue are heaped in the middle of the court, and
    rank weeds spread over the consecrated pile. We therefore deem it
    our bounden duty to dispatch a messenger unto our brethren, the
    children of Israel, who are dispersed and in exile, in order to
    acquaint them with 'the salvation of the Lord in the land,' so that
    they may arise and take pity on Zion, for it is time to show mercy
    unto her.

    "To undertake this laborious duty was the voluntary offer of
    our dearly beloved friend, that profound and renowned Rabbi,
    the zealous and honorable _Aaron Selig Ashkenazi_. He is a man
    confirmed in the {175} fear of the Lord, of a faithful stock;
    and him we depute as our messenger, worthy of all trust, to make
    proclamation unto the communities of Israel 'according to the sight
    which he has seen in the Holy Mount,' and to him we have given
    letters of authorization, containing full particulars as to his
    pious mission, and every necessary information relating thereto.

    "Now, therefore, let the righteous behold and rejoice. Let the
    pious exult and triumph in gladness. The day ye have so long hoped
    for is come, and ye see it. The crown of holiness will again adorn
    its former abode. Therefore, arise, and take upon yourselves,
    according to the words of this letter, to devote a portion of your
    wealth as a sacred tribute towards erecting 'the Temple of the Most
    Holy King on the mountain of the Lord'--that ye may have a portion
    and a righteous record in Jerusalem.

    "Let no one among you refuse his aid, but let the poor man
    contribute his mite for himself and his household freely, as the
    rich dispenses the bounty wherewith the Lord hath blessed him. Let
    fathers and their offspring, the aged and the youthful, alike arise
    in mercy to Zion at this propitious season.

    "Let each man encourage his neighbor and say, 'We will be zealous
    and persevering for our people and the City of our God. And for the
    love of Zion, and the sake of Jerusalem, we will not rest nor be
    easy until Jerusalem is praised throughout the earth, and foremost
    in our joys, even as we have vowed:--If I forget thee, Jerusalem,
    let my right hand forget her cunning; if I prefer not Jerusalem
    above my chief joy.'

    "Such are the words of your brethren who address you for the
    glory of God, and for the honor of His land, His people and His
    inheritance--continually praying for our exiled brethren, and
    offering up our orisons on holy ground and particularly near the
    _Western Wall_, that it may be well with you everlastingly as you
    yourself desire, and we most sincerely wish.

    "Signed at Jerusalem, the 18th day of year 5597 a. m., by the
    Wardens of the Medrash, and members of the Building Committee, on
    behalf of the Congregation of German Jews in this Holy City.

    ["Signed] Hirsh Joseph,

    "David Reuben,

    "Nathan Saddis,

    "Abraham S. Salmons,

    "Mordecai Avigdor,

    "Uriah S. Hyam."

    The undersigned Assessors of the Bethdin, by the direction of
    the {176} Rev. Chief Rabbi, hereby certify that Rev. Aaron Selig
    Ashkenazi is actually deputed for the purpose mentioned in the
    above circular.

    "London, the 7th Tebath,

    "24 Dec. 5599.

    "Israel Levy,

    "Aaron Levy,

    "A. L. Barnett."

_Monday, August 3_.--Elders Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith are at
Ledbury, Herefordshire.

_Tuesday, 4_.--Elder Heber C. Kimball left Manchester for
Herefordshire, and Joseph Fielding is at Bedford.

_Wednesday, 5_.

    _Extract of a Letter from Wilford Woodruff to the Editor of the
    Millennial Star--Reporting Labors_.

    Beloved Brethren:--Since Elder George A. Smith and myself left
    Manchester for the purpose of going to the south of England, we
    have visited the churches which lay in our route, and found them
    universally prospering and receiving additions.

    We preached in Leek on Sunday, July 10th, and Elder Smith baptized
    six persons after meeting: and numbers were also baptized in the
    churches at the Staffordshire Potteries while we were there. We
    passed through West Bromwich and Birmingham, and found numbers
    who were anxiously wishing for some of the Elders to visit that
    region and labor among them. We arrived in Ludbury, Herefordshire,
    July 22nd, and here spent about two weeks in visiting the churches
    through this region, and I am happy to inform you, that we have
    found the Saints universally rejoicing in the truth, and the work
    progressing upon every hand.

    Elder Thomas Richardson has baptized about forty since he came,
    and Elder William Kay about twenty; they are both much blessed in
    their labors. Elder Kington is laboring constantly in this wide
    field, which is under his care; and he with the Elders and Priests
    generally throughout this region are blessed with many souls as
    seals of their ministry. We baptized forty on Sunday last in this
    region, making 250 since the conference. The churches here now
    number about 800 members and appear [to be] in a very prosperous
    state. We are expecting Elder Kimball every hour, and soon after
    his arrival we shall leave the Saints in this region, for the
    purpose of visiting the city of London and warning the inhabitants
    thereof.

    Wilford Woodruff.

{177} _Saturday, 8_.--Soon after the July conference at Manchester,
Elder Parley P. Pratt started for America for the purpose of getting
his family and taking them to England, meantime leaving the _Star_ in
charge of President Brigham Young, assisted by Elder Willard Richards.

    _The Prophet's Letter to John C. Bennett--Bidding Him Welcome to
    Nauvoo, to partake of--its Poverty_.

    Nauvoo, Hancock County, Illinois,

    August 8th, 1840.

    Dear Sir:--Yours of the 25th ultimo, addressed to Elder Rigdon and
    myself, is received, for which you have our thanks, and to which I
    shall feel great pleasure in replying.

    Although I have not the pleasure of your acquaintance, yet from
    the kindness manifested towards our people when in bondage and
    oppression, and from the frank and noble mindedness breathed in
    your letter, I am brought to the conclusion that you are a friend
    to suffering humanity and truth.

    To those who have suffered so much abuse, and borne the cruelties
    and insults of wicked men so long, on account of those principles
    which we have been instructed to teach to the world, a feeling of
    sympathy and kindness is something like the refreshing breeze and
    cooling stream at the present season of the year, and are, I assure
    you, duly appreciated by us.

    It would afford me much pleasure to see you at this place, and from
    the desire you express in your letter to move to this place, I hope
    I shall soon have that satisfaction.

    I have no doubt you would be of great service to this community
    in practicing your profession, as well as those other abilities
    of which you are in possession. Since to devote your time and
    abilities in the cause of truth and a suffering people may not
    be the means of exalting you in the eyes of this generation, or
    securing you the riches of the world, yet by so doing you may rely
    on the approval of Jehovah, "that blessing which maketh rich and
    addeth no sorrow." Through the tender mercies of our God we have
    escaped the hands of those who sought our overthrow, and have
    secure locations in this state, and in the territory of Iowa. Our
    principal location is at this place, Nauvoo, (formerly Commerce),
    which is beautifully situated on the banks of the Mississippi,
    immediately above the lower rapids, and is probably the best and
    most beautiful site for a city on the river. It has a gradual
    ascent from the river nearly a mile, then a fine, level, and
    fertile prairie--a situation in {178} every respect adapted to
    commercial and agricultural pursuits, but like all other places on
    the river, is sickly in summer.

    The number of inhabitants is nearly three thousand, and is fast
    increasing. If we are suffered to remain, [9] there is every
    prospect of its becoming one of the largest cities on the river, if
    not in the western world. Numbers have moved in from the seaboard,
    and a few from the islands of the sea (Great Britain).

    It is our intention to commence the erection of some public
    buildings next spring. We have purchased twenty thousand acres in
    the Iowa Territory opposite this place, which is fast filling up
    with our people. I desire all the Saints, as well as all lovers
    of truth and correct principles, to come to this place as fast as
    possible, or [as rapidly as] their circumstances will permit, and
    endeavor, by energy of action and concentration of talent, &c.,
    &c., to effect those objects, that are so dear to us. Therefore my
    general invitation is, Let all that will, come, and partake of the
    poverty of Nauvoo freely.

    I should be disposed to give you a special invitation to come
    as early as possible, believing you will be of great service
    to us; however, you must make arrangements according to your
    circumstances. Were it possible for you to come here this season
    to suffer affliction with the people of God, no one will be more
    pleased to give you a more cordial welcome than myself.

    A charter has been obtained from the legislature for a railroad
    from Warsaw, being immediately below the rapids of the Mississippi,
    to this place--a distance of about twenty miles, which if carried
    into operation will be of incalculable advantage to this place, as
    steamboats can only ascend the rapids at a high stage of water. The
    soil is good, and I think not inferior to any in the state. Crops
    are abundant in this section of country--and I think provisions
    will be reasonable.

    I should be very happy could I make arrangements to meet you in
    Springfield at the time you mention--but cannot promise myself that
    pleasure. If I should not, probably you can make it convenient to
    come and pay us a visit here, prior to your removal.

    Elder Rigdon is very sick, and has been for nearly twelve months
    with the fever and ague, which disease is very prevalent here at
    this time. At present he is not able to leave his room.

    Yours, &c.,

    Joseph Smith, Jun.

    To J. C. Bennett, M. D.

    P. S.--Yours of the 30th is just received, in which I am glad to
    learn that your increasing desire to unite yourself with a people
    "that are {179} everywhere spoken against," and the anxiety you
    feel for our welfare--for which you have my best feelings; and I
    pray that my heavenly Father will pour out His choicest blessings
    in this world, and enable you by His grace to overcome the evils
    which are in the world, that you may secure a blissful immortality
    in the world that is to come.

    J. S., Jun.

_August 10_.--Colonel Seymour Brunson, aged forty years, ten months
and twenty-three days, died at Nauvoo. Colonel Brunson was among
the first settlers of this place. He has always been a lively stone
in the building of God and was much respected by his friends and
acquaintances. He died in the triumph of faith, and in his dying
moments bore testimony to the Gospel that he had embraced.

_Saturday, 15_.

    _Letter of John C. Bennett to Messrs. Smith and Rigdon--Announcing
    that he will soon be in Nauvoo_.

    Wayne County Illinois, August 15, 1840.

    _Reverends Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon_.

    Respected Friends:--I have written you several communications to
    Commerce and Nauvoo, supposing they were different places, but a
    brother to a lady in your community, now in this place, informs me
    that they are one and the same.

    I have received no reply to my letters, and attribute the delay
    to a press of business or professional absence. I have come to
    the conclusion to join your people immediately, and take up my
    abode with you. Let us adopt as our motto--_Licut partribus sit
    Deus nobius_--(as God was with our fathers, so may He be with
    us), and adapt the means to the end, and the victory is ours. The
    winged warrior of the air will not cease to be our proud emblem of
    liberty, and the dogs of war will be forever chained.

    I shall be with you in about two weeks, and shall devote my time
    and energies to the advancement of the cause of truth and virtue,
    and the advocacy of the holy religion which you have so nobly
    defended, and so honorably sustained.

    My love to all the brethren.

    With sentiments of fraternal regard.

    Yours respectfully,

    J. C. Bennett.

Footnotes:

1. Formerly a town in Kent and Surrey, England, on the Thames, noted
for its dock yards, now part of London.

2. Lorenzo Snow was born April 30, 1814, in Mantua, Portage county,
Ohio. He was the eldest son of Oliver Snow and Rosetta L. Pettibone.
The early years of his life were spent upon his father's farm. Later
he entered Oberlin College, a Presbyterian institution, in the town
of Oberlin, in Lorain county, Ohio, about sixty miles southwest of
Kirtland. In June, 1836, he visited Kirtland and attended the Hebrew
classes, then being taught in the Temple. While in Kirtland he became
a convert to the faith of the Latter-day Saints and was baptized by
Elder John Boynton, one of the Twelve Apostles. The following year he
did some missionary work among his relatives and friends in Ohio, and
in 1836, with his parents, who in the meantime joined the Church, he
moved to Missouri, and shortly afterwards went upon a preaching mission
through the states of Kentucky and Illinois. A few days before starting
upon this mission mentioned in the text, namely, 17th of July, 1840, he
was ordained a seventy by President Joseph Young, and the day following
was made a High Priest under the hands of Don Carlos Smith. The
testimony which this man received of the truth of the Gospel is very
interesting, and seems to have remained with him throughout his long
life, in all the freshness of its first impression upon him. Having
received the usual promise of a testimony of the truth of the work if
he obeyed the Gospel, he sought that testimony most earnestly in prayer
with the following result as stated by himself:

"I had no sooner opened my lips in an effort to pray than I heard
a sound just above my head like the rushing of silken robes; and
immediately the Spirit of God descended upon me, completely enveloping
my whole person, filling me from the crown of my head to the soles of
my feet, and oh, the joyful happiness I felt! No language can describe
the almost instantaneous transition from a dense cloud of spiritual
darkness into a refulgence of light and knowledge, as it was at that
time imparted to my understanding. I received a perfect knowledge that
God lives, that Jesus Christ is the son of God, and of the restoration
of the Holy Priesthood, and the fullness of the Gospel. It was a
complete baptism--a tangible immersion in the heavenly principle or
element, the Holy Ghost; and even more physical in its effects upon
every part of my system than the immersion by water."

3. When the great offense of Elder William W. Phelps is taken into
account--amounting as it did to a betrayal of the Prophet and the
Church in Missouri, during the troubles of the Saints in that
state--this letter is remarkable. The Prophet's frank forgiveness of
his erring brother, gently chiding his wrong-doing, but at the same
time remembering in a large way that brother's former devotion and
labors; the Prophet's willingness to have the prodigal return and
occupy his former high standing among the Saints--all this exhibits a
broad-mindedness and generosity that can come only from a great soul,
influenced by the spirit of charity enjoined upon his disciples by the
teachings of the Son of God. One of the surest evidences of Joseph
Smith's greatness of mind and of the inspiration of God upon him is
to be seen in his treatment of those who had fallen but were willing
to and did repent of their sins. His capacity to forgive under these
circumstances seemed boundless.

4. The article which appeared first in a periodical, entitled "Memorial
Concerning God's Ancient People of Israel," and then in the _London
Times_, seems to have been written by a Christian Jew. It deals largely
with the promises of God to ancient Israel, especially as to their
return as a people to Palestine. The closing paragraph is an appeal to
the Protestant powers of the north of Europe and America to assist in
this restoration: "As the spirit of Cyrus, king of Persia, was stirred
up to build the Lord a temple, which was in Jerusalem (2 Chron.,
xxxvi:22, 23), who is there among you, high and mighty ones of all the
nations, to find the good pleasure of the holy will of the Lord of
heaven, saying to Jerusalem, 'Thou shalt be built,' and to the temple,
'Thy foundation shall be laid?' (Isa. xliv:28). The Lord God of Israel
be with such. Great grace, mercy and peace shall descend upon the
people who offer themselves willingly; and the free offerings of their
hearts and hands shall be those of a sweet smelling savor unto him who
hath said, 'I will bless thee (Gen. xii:3), and contend with him that
contendeth with thee.'" (Isa. xlix:25).

5. "This was a Dr. John C. Bennett, a man who seems to have been
without any moral character, but who had filled positions of
importance. Born in Massachusetts in 1804, he practiced as a physician
in Ohio, and later in Illinois, holding a professorship in Willoughby
University, Ohio, and taking with him to Illinois testimonials as to
his professional skill. In the latter state he showed a taste for
military affairs, and after being elected brigadier-general of the
Invincible Dragoons, he was appointed quartermaster-general of the
state in 1840, and held that position at the state capital when the
Mormons applied to the legislature for a charter for Nauvoo." ("The
Story of the Mormons," Linn, 1901).

6. Translation: In essentials, unity; in non-essentials, liberty; in
all things, charity.

7. Gently in the manner, firmly in the act.

8. Elder John Taylor was accompanied on this mission by Brothers
McGuffie and William Black. Elder Taylor had baptized Brother
McGuffie while laboring in Liverpool; and as the new convert had some
acquaintances in Newry, county Down, Ireland, he thought it advisable
to take him along. A large company of saints went with them to see
them off. The day after sailing, Elder Taylor and companions arrived
in Newry, a beautiful Irish village nestling among rolling hills,
characteristic of that part of Ireland. Brother McGuffie obtained the
court house to hold a meeting in, and sent around the bell-man to give
notice of it. A congregation of six or seven hundred gathered in at
seven o'clock in the evening, and Elder Taylor preached to them. This
was the introduction of the Gospel into Ireland.

9. "If we are suffered to remain" sounds somewhat prophetic and ominous.

{180}



Chapter X.

A Missouri Kidnapping--Continued Development of the Work in Great
Britain--The Death of Joseph Smith, Sen., First Patriarch of the Church.

[Sidenote: Settlement of a Difficulty.]

_Monday, 17_.--Met with the High Council of Nauvoo at my office, also
the High Council of Iowa. John Batten preferred many charges against
Elijah Fordham. After the testimony, and the councillors had spoken,
I addressed the Council at some length, showing the situation of the
contending parties, that there was in reality no cause of difference;
that they had better be reconciled without an action, or vote of the
Council, and henceforth live as brethren, and never more mention their
former difficulties. They settled accordingly.

_Tuesday, 18_.--Elders Kimball, Woodruff, and George A. Smith left
Cheltenham for London, one hundred and ten miles, where they arrived
in seven and a half hours, at William Allgood's, No. 19 King Street,
Borough, and were kindly received by Mrs. Allgood, who took them to the
King's Arms Inn.

Great distress is prevailing in Ireland; no work, and provisions very
scarce.

The truth is spreading rapidly in England and Scotland.

_Friday, 21_--Testimony of Benjamin Boyce:

    _The Kidnapping of Benjamin Boyce, Mr. Brown, et al_.

    I left my home in Nauvoo to go to Adams county, where I had lived
    the summer before, for the purpose of meeting some debts. I fell in
    company with a Mr. Brown, who stated to me that he was in search
    of some horses that had strayed from him. We had not proceeded
    far {181} together, before we were hailed by twelve armed men,
    who demanded of us where we were going. I stated to them where I
    was going, and likewise Mr. Brown stated his business. They then
    asked if we were "Mormons;" we said we were; they then said that
    we could go no further; they said they were sworn to kill all the
    damned "Mormons" that they could find, and took us prisoners, tied
    us with ropes, and took us to a boat, and four of the company (one
    by the name of Martin, the others not known) took us to Missouri,
    to a little town called Tully, where we were put under guard, and
    kept till 11 o'clock in the evening, when three men came to us
    with a long rope, and tied it round each of our necks. I asked
    them what they were going to do with us; one said they were going
    to take us to the river, kill us, and make catfish bait of us, his
    name was Uno. They then led us to the woods, I should think about
    three-quarters of a mile distant; they then parted us, took and
    stripped me naked, and tied me fast to a tree; one of the company
    cocked a pistol and placed it close to my ear, and swore, if I
    attempted to get away, that he would blow out my brains. They
    then commenced to whip me with large gads which they had for the
    purpose, and literally mangled me from my shoulders to my knees.

    There were in the company, as near as I could recollect, twelve
    or fourteen: they were stripped of their hats and coats, with
    their sleeves rolled up, and collars open, which made them look
    like murderers and robbers. The names, as far as I can recollect,
    Monday, Uno, and Martin; the others I do not recollect. After
    keeping me tied in this condition I should think an hour and
    a half, they then brought Mr. Brown to me, and after some
    consultation, loosed me from the tree where I was tied, and led
    us back to the town, put us in a room where I saw Noah Rogers and
    James Allred. They then tied them about the neck, and led them out,
    and in the course of the night, they brought them back to the room
    where we were.

    Brother Rogers said they stripped him, and whipped him very badly.
    This was on the seventh of July. The next day Rogers and myself
    were taken before a magistrate; nothing proven against us, only
    that we were "Mormons:" and we were ordered to prison. Brown and
    Allred, by some means, were liberated, but we (Rogers and myself)
    were put in jail and put in irons until the 21st of August, when
    through the kindness of God we made our escape and returned to
    Nauvoo.

    Benjamin Boyce.

_Sunday, 23_.--Ten persons who had been baptized were confirmed at
Carpenter's Hall, Manchester. [1]

{182} _Saturday, 29_--Elder Kimball writes: "The brethren are beginning
to excite attention in some of the public grounds in London." Out-door
preaching is common in England.

_Sunday, 30_.--Twenty were confirmed at the hall in Manchester. [2]

[Sidenote: The Beginning of Open Air Meetings.]

Elders Kimball, Woodruff, and George A. Smith, after having spent ten
days visiting the clergymen and preachers and others of the several
denominations, asking the privilege of preaching in their chapels,
and being continually refused by them in a contemptuous manner, they
determined to preach in the open air, Jonah-like; and accordingly went
to Smithfield Market [3] (to the spot where John Rogers [4] was burnt
at the stake), for the purpose of preaching at 10 a. m., {183} where
they were notified by the police, that the Lord Mayor had issued orders
prohibiting street preaching in the city. A Mr. Connor stepped up and
said, "I will show you a place outside of his jurisdiction," and guided
them to "Tabernacle Square," where they found an assembly of about 400
people listening to a preacher who was standing on a chair. When he got
through another preacher arose to speak. Elder Kimball stated to the
first clergyman, "There is a man present from America who would like
to preach;" which was granted; when Elder George A. Smith delivered
a discourse of about twenty minutes, on the first principles of the
Gospel, taking for his text, Mark xvi: 16; after which Elder Kimball
asked the preacher to give out another appointment at the same place
for the American Elder to preach; when he jumped up and said, "I have
just learned that the gentleman who has addressed you is a Latter-day
Saint; I know them--they are a very bad people; they have split up
many churches, and have done a great deal of hurt." He spoke all
manner of evil, and gave the Latter-day Saints a very bad character,
and commanded the people not to hear the Elders, "as we have got the
Gospel, and can save the people, without infidelity, socialism, or
Latter-day Saints."

Elder Kimball asked the privilege of standing on the chair to give out
an appointment himself. The preacher said, "You shall not do it; you
have no right to preach here;" jerked the chair away from him, and ran
away with it. Several of the crowd said, "You have as much right to
preach here as he has, and give out your appointment;" whereupon Elder
Kimball gave out an {184} appointment for 3 o'clock p. m.; at which
time a large congregation was gathered.

After opening the meeting by singing and prayer, Elder Woodruff spoke
about thirty minutes, from Gal. i: 8, 9, upon the first principles of
the Gospel. Elder Kimball followed upon the same subjects. The people
gave good attention, and seemed much interested in what they had heard.
The inhabitants who lived around the square opened their windows
to four stories high; the most of them were crowded with anxious
listeners, which is an uncommon occurrence. The meeting was dismissed
in the midst of good feeling.

Mr. Henry Connor invited the Elders to his house. Soon after they
arrived here, Elder Kimball felt impressed to return to the place of
preaching. When he got there he found a large company talking about the
things which they had heard in the afternoon, and they wished him to
speak to them again. He did so, when several persons invited him home
with them. While Elder Kimball was preaching, several persons came to
Brothers Woodruff and Smith to converse on doctrine, when Mr. Connor
offered himself for baptism.

_Monday, 31_.--Elder Kimball baptized Henry Connor, watchmaker, 52
Ironmonger's Row, London, in Peerless Pool, being the first baptized in
that place, and confirmed him the same evening.

[Sidenote: The Electric Telegraph.]

The electric telegraph is beginning to be used on the Great Western
Railroad in England, between Drayton and Paddington, by which
intelligence is communicated at the rate of two hundred thousand miles
per second.

    _An Address by the First Presidency to the Church_.

    _To the Saints Scattered Abroad_:

    Beloved Brethren:--We address a few lines to the members of the
    Church of Jesus Christ, who have obeyed from the heart that form of
    doctrine which has been delivered to them by the servants of the
    Lord, {185} and who are desirous to go forward in the ways of truth
    and righteousness, and by obedience to the heavenly command, escape
    the things which are coming on the earth, and secure to themselves
    an inheritance among the sanctified in the world to come.

    Having been placed in a very responsible station in the Church, we
    at all times feel interested in the welfare of the Saints, and make
    mention of them continually in our prayers to our heavenly Father,
    that they may be kept from the evils which are in the world, and
    ever be found walking in the path of truth.

    The work of the Lord in these last days, is one of vast magnitude
    and almost beyond the comprehension of mortals. Its glories are
    past description, and its grandeur unsurpassable. It is the theme
    which has animated the bosom of prophets and righteous men from the
    creation of the world down through every succeeding generation to
    the present time; and it is truly the dispensation of the fullness
    of times, when all things which are in Christ Jesus, whether in
    heaven or on the earth, shall be gathered together in Him, and
    when all things shall be restored, as spoken of by all the holy
    prophets since the world began; for in it will take place the
    glorious fulfilment of the promises made to the fathers, while
    the manifestations of the power of the Most High will be great,
    glorious, and sublime.

    The purposes of our God are great, His love unfathomable, His
    wisdom infinite, and His power unlimited; therefore, the Saints
    have cause to rejoice and be glad, knowing that "this God is our
    God forever and ever, and He will be our Guide until death." Having
    confidence in the power, wisdom, and love of God, the Saints have
    been enabled to go forward through the most adverse circumstances,
    and frequently, when to all human appearances, nothing but death
    presented itself, and destruction inevitable, has the power of God
    been manifest, His glory revealed, and deliverance effected; and
    the Saints, like the children of Israel, who came out of the land
    of Egypt, and through the Red Sea, have sung an anthem of praise
    to his holy name. This has not only been the case in former days,
    but in our days, and within a few months, have we seen this fully
    verified.

    Having through the kindness of our God been delivered from
    destruction, and having secured a location upon which we have
    again commenced operations for the good of His people, we feel
    disposed to go forward and unite our energies for the upbuilding
    of the Kingdom, and establishing the Priesthood in their fullness
    and glory. The work which has to be accomplished in the last days
    is one of vast importance, and will call into action the energy,
    skill, talent, and ability of the Saints, so that it may roll forth
    with that glory and majesty described by the prophet; and will
    consequently require the {186} concentration of the Saints, to
    accomplish works of such magnitude and grandeur.

    The work of the gathering spoken of in the Scriptures will be
    necessary to bring about the glories of the last dispensation. It
    is probably unnecessary to press this subject on the Saints, as we
    believe the spirit of it is manifest, and its necessity obvious to
    every considerate mind; and everyone zealous for the promotion of
    truth and righteousness, is equally so for the gathering of the
    Saints.

    Dear brethren, feeling desirous to carry out the purposes of God
    to which work we have been called; and to be co-workers with
    Him in this last dispensation; we feel the necessity of having
    the hearty cooperation of the Saints throughout this land, and
    upon the islands of the sea. It will be necessary for the Saints
    to hearken to counsel and turn their attention to the Church,
    the establishment of the Kingdom, and lay aside every selfish
    principle, everything low and groveling; and stand forward in the
    cause of truth, and assist to the utmost of their power, those to
    whom has been given the pattern and design. Like those who held up
    the hands of Moses, so let us hold up the hands of those who are
    appointed to direct the affairs of the Kingdom, so that they may be
    strengthened, and be enabled to prosecute their great designs, and
    be instrumental in effecting the great work of the last days.

    Believing the time has now come, when it is necessary to erect
    a house of prayer, a house of order, a house for the worship of
    our God, where the ordinances can be attended to agreeably to
    His divine will, in this region of country--to accomplish which,
    considerable exertion must be made, and means will be required--and
    as the work must be hastened in righteousness, it behooves the
    Saints to weigh the importance of these things, in their minds,
    in all their bearings, and then take such steps as are necessary
    to carry them into operation; and arming themselves with courage,
    resolve to do all they can, and feel themselves as much interested
    as though the whole labor depended on themselves alone. By so doing
    they will emulate the glorious deeds of the fathers, and secure
    the blessings of heaven upon themselves and their posterity to the
    latest generation.

    To those who feel thus interested, and can assist in this great
    work, we say, let them come to this place; by so doing they will
    not only assist in the rolling on of the Kingdom, but be in a
    situation where they can have the advantages of instruction from
    the Presidency and other authorities of the Church, and rise higher
    and higher in the scale of intelligence until they can "comprehend
    with all Saints what is the breadth and length, and depth and
    height; and to know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge."

    {187} Connected with the building up of the Kingdom, is the
    printing and circulation of the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and
    Covenants, hymnbook, and the new translation of the Scriptures. It
    is unnecessary to say anything respecting these works; those who
    have read them, and who have drunk of the stream of knowledge which
    they convey, know how to appreciate them; and although fools may
    have them in derision, yet they are calculated to make men wise
    unto salvation, and sweep away the cobwebs of superstition of ages,
    throw a light on the proceedings of Jehovah which have already
    been accomplished, and mark out the future in all its dreadful and
    glorious realities. Those who have tasted the benefit derived from
    a study of these works, will undoubtedly vie with each other in
    their zeal for sending them abroad throughout the world, that every
    son of Adam may enjoy the same privileges, and rejoice in the same
    truths.

    Here, then, beloved brethren, is a work to engage in worthy of
    archangels--a work which will cast into the shade the things which
    have been heretofore accomplished; a work which kings and prophets
    and righteous men in former ages have sought, expected, and
    earnestly desired to see, but died without the sight; and well will
    it be for those who shall aid in carrying into effect the mighty
    operations of Jehovah.

    By order of the First Presidency,

    Robert B. Thompson, Scribe.

_Saturday, September 5_.--Elders Young and Richards went from
Manchester to Liverpool, and in the evening organized a company of
Saints bound for New York, by choosing Elder Theodore Turley to
preside, with six counselors.

    _Minutes of the High Council Meeting, at the Office of Joseph
    Smith, Jun., Nauvoo, September 5th, 1840_.

    Joseph Smith, Jun., preferred charges against Elder Almon W.
    Babbitt, predicated on the authority of two letters, one from
    Thomas Burdick, the other from Oliver Granger and Levi Richards,
    accusing Elder Babbitt as follows:

    First. For stating that Joseph Smith, Jun., had extravagantly
    purchased three suits of clothes while he was at Washington City,
    and that Sidney Rigdon had purchased four suits while at the same
    place besides dresses in profusion for their families.

    Second. For having stated that Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon
    and Elias Higbee had said that they were worth one hundred thousand
    dollars each, while they were at Washington, and that Joseph Smith,
    {188} Jun., had repeated the same statement while in Philadelphia,
    and for saying that Oliver Granger had stated that he also was
    worth as much as they (that is, one hundred thousand dollars).

    Third. For holding secret councils in the Lord's House, in
    Kirtland, and for locking the doors of the house, for the purpose
    of prohibiting certain brethren in good standing in the Church,
    from being in the Council, thereby depriving them of the use of the
    house.

    Two were appointed to speak on the case, namely, Thomas Grover,
    Austin Cowles.

    Council adjourned till the 6th September, at 2 o'clock, when
    Council met according to adjournment, the evidences were all heard
    on the case pending, and the councilors closed on both sides. The
    parties spoke at length, after which, Joseph Smith withdrew the
    charge, and both parties were reconciled to each other, things
    being adjusted to their satisfaction.

_Sunday 6_.--Elder Young preached.

_Monday 7_.--This evening, Elders Kimball, Woodruff and George A.
Smith, preached in the south Temperance Hall, London.

On Monday night, Elders Brigham Young and Willard Richards, stayed on
board the _North America_ with the Saints, and on Tuesday morning,
about nine o'clock, the vessel went out with a steamer. The Elders
accompanied them fifteen or twenty miles, and left them in good
spirits. Elder Richards returned to Manchester the same evening and
Elder Young on the 10th.

[Sidenote: The Generosity of John Benbow.]

Elder John Benbow, who had previously furnished two hundred and
fifty pounds towards printing the hymn book, Book of Mormon, etc.,
relinquished all claim to said money, except such assistance as his
friends, who might wish to emigrate to America the next season, might
need, leaving the remainder to the disposal of Brigham Young, Willard
Richards, and Wilford Woodruff, who borrowed said moneys for the
benefit of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, forever,
also the avails of the Gadfield Elm Chapel, when sold.

_Wednesday, 9_.--There was a terrific storm on the North of Scotland.

{189} [Sidenote: Earthquake at Mount Ararat.]

_Friday, 11_.--There was a terrible earthquake at Mount Ararat, which
destroyed the town of Makitchevan, damaged all the buildings at Erivan,
and devastated the two districts of Sharour and Sourmate in Armenia.
A considerable mass was loosened from Mount Ararat and destroyed
everything in its way for nearly five miles. The village of Akhouli was
buried, with one thousand inhabitants.

_Sunday, 13_.--Elder Kimball baptized four in London.

[Sidenote: The Death of Joseph, Sen.]

_Monday, 14_.--My father, Joseph Smith, Sen., Patriarch of the whole
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, died at Nauvoo.

    _Biography of Joseph Smith, Sen., Presiding Patriarch of the
    Church, by the Prophet Joseph, his Son_.

    Joseph Smith, Sen., was born on the 12th day of July, 1771, in
    Topsfield, Essex county, Massachusetts; he was the second of the
    seven sons of Asahel and Mary Smith. Asahel was born in Topsfield,
    March 7th, 1744. He was the youngest son of Samuel and Priscilla
    Smith. Samuel was born January 26th, 1714, in Topsfield; he was
    the eldest son of Samuel and Rebecca Smith. Samuel was born in
    Topsfield, January 20, 1666, and was the son of Robert and Mary
    Smith, who emigrated from Old England.

    My father removed with his father to Tunbridge, Orange county,
    Vermont, in 1791, and assisted in clearing a large farm of a heavy
    growth of timber. He married Lucy, daughter of Solomon and Lydia
    Mack on the 14th of January, 1796, by whom he had

    Alvin Smith, born February 11th, 1798, died November 19th, 1824.

    Hyrum, born February 9th, 1800.

    Sophronia, born May 16th, 1803.

    Joseph, born December 23rd, 1805.

    Samuel Harrison, born March 13th, 1808.

    Ephraim, born March 13th, 1810, died March 24th, 1810.

    William, born March 13th, 1811.

    Catherine, born July 28th, 1812.

    Don Carlos, born March 25th, 1816.

    Lucy, born July 18th, 1824.

    At his marriage he owned a handsome farm in Tunbridge. In 1802,
    {190} he rented it and engaged in mercantile business, and soon
    after embarked in a venture of [raising] ginseng [5] to send
    to China, and was swindled out of the entire proceeds by the
    shipmaster and agent, he was consequently obliged to sell his farm
    and all of his effects to pay his debts.

    About the year 1816 he removed to Palmyra, Wayne county, New York,
    bought a farm and cleared two hundred acres, which he lost in
    consequence of not being able to pay the last installment of the
    purchase money at the time it was due. This was the case with a
    great number of farmers in New York, who had cleared land under
    similar contracts. He afterwards moved to Manchester, Ontario
    county, New York, procured a comfortable home with sixteen acres of
    land, where he lived until he removed to Kirtland, Ohio.

    He was the first person who received my testimony after I had seen
    the angel, and exhorted me to be faithful and diligent to the
    message I had received. [6] He was baptized April 6th, 1830.

    In August, 1830, in company with my brother Don Carlos, he took a
    mission to St. Lawrence county, New York, touching on his route at
    several of the Canadian ports, where he distributed a few copies
    of the Book of Mormon. He also visited his father, brothers and
    sister residing in St. Lawrence county, bore testimony to the truth
    which resulted eventually in all the family coming into the Church,
    excepting his brother Jesse and sister Susan.

    He removed with his family to Kirtland in 1831; was ordained
    Patriarch and President of the High Priesthood [in Kirtland] [7]
    under the hands of Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, Frederick G.
    Williams and myself, on the 18th of December, 1833; was a member of
    the First High Council, organized on the 17th of February, 1834,
    (when he conferred on me and my brother Samuel H., a father's
    blessing).

    {191} In 1836 he traveled in company with his brother John two
    thousand four hundred miles in Ohio, New York, Pennsylvania,
    Vermont, and New Hampshire, visiting the branches of the Church in
    those states and bestowing patriarchal blessings on several hundred
    persons, preaching the Gospel to all who would hear, and baptizing
    many. They returned to Kirtland on the 2nd of October, 1836.

    During the persecutions in Kirtland in 1837, he was made a
    prisoner, but fortunately obtained his liberty, and after a very
    tedious journey in the spring and summer of 1838, he arrived at Far
    West, Missouri. After I and my brother Hyrum were thrown into the
    Missouri jails by the mob, he fled from under the exterminating
    order of Governor Lilburn W. Boggs, and made his escape in
    midwinter to Quincy, Illinois, from whence he removed to Commerce
    in the spring of 1839.

    The exposures he suffered brought on consumption, of which he died
    on this 14th day of September, 1840, aged sixty-nine years, two
    months, and two days. He was six feet, two inches high, was very
    straight, and remarkably well proportioned. His ordinary weight was
    about two hundred pounds, and he was very strong and active. In
    his younger days he was famed as a wrestler, and, Jacob like, he
    never wrestled with but one man whom he could not throw. He was one
    of the most benevolent of men; opening his house to all who were
    destitute. While at Quincy, Illinois, he fed hundreds of the poor
    Saints who were flying from the Missouri persecutions, although he
    had arrived there penniless himself.

_Tuesday, 15_.--The funeral of Joseph Smith, Sen., took place this day,
when the following address was delivered by Elder Robert B. Thompson:

    _The Discourse of Elder Thompson at the Funeral of Joseph Smith,
    Sen_.

    The occasion which has brought us together this day, is one of no
    {192} ordinary importance: for not only has a single family to
    mourn and sorrow on account of the death of the individual, whose
    funeral obsequies we this day celebrate; but a whole society; yes,
    thousands will this day have to say, _a Father in Israel is gone_.

    The man whom we have been accustomed to look up to as a
    _Patriarch_, a Father, and a Counselor is no more an inhabitant
    of mortality: he has dropped his clay tenement, bid adieu to
    terrestrial scenes, and his spirit now free and unencumbered, roams
    and expatiates in that world where the spirits of just men made
    perfect dwell, and where pain and sickness, tribulation and death
    cannot come.

    The friends we have lost prior to our late venerable and lamented
    Father, were such as rendered life sweet, and in whose society we
    took great pleasure, and who shed a lustre in the several walks
    of life in which they moved, and to whom we feel endeared by
    friendship's sacred ties. Their virtues and kindnesses will long be
    remembered by the sorrowing widow, the disconsolate husband, the
    weeping children, the almost distracted and heart-broken parent,
    and by a large circle of acquaintances and friends. These, like
    the stars in yonder firmament, shone in their several spheres, and
    filled that station to which they had been called by the providence
    of God, with honor to themselves and to the Church; and we feel to
    mingle our tears with their surviving relatives.

    But on this occasion we realize that we have suffered more than an
    ordinary bereavement, and consequently we feel the more interested.
    If ever there was a man who had claims on the affections of the
    community, it was our beloved but now deceased Patriarch. If ever
    there was an event calculated to raise the feelings of sorrow in
    the human breast, and cause us to drop the sympathetic tear, it
    certainly is the present; for truly we can say with the king of
    Israel, "A prince and a great man has fallen in Israel." A man
    endeared to us by every feeling calculated to entwine around and
    adhere to the human heart, by almost indissoluble bonds. A man
    faithful to his God and to the Church in every situation and under
    all circumstances through which he was called to pass.

    Whether in prosperity, surrounded by the comforts of life, a
    smiling progeny, and all the enjoyments of a domestic circle; or
    when called upon, like the Patriarchs of old, to leave the land
    of his nativity, to journey in strange lands, and become subject
    to all the trials and persecutions that have been heaped upon
    the Saints with a liberal hand, by characters destitute of every
    principle of morality or religion, alike regardless of the tender
    offspring and the aged sire, whose silvery locks and furrowed
    cheeks ought to have been a sufficient shield from their cruelty;
    still, like the Apostle Paul he could exclaim, (and his life {193}
    and conduct have fully borne out the sentiment) "None of these
    things move me; neither count I my life dear, so that I may finish
    my course with joy."

    The principles of the Gospel were too well established in that
    breast, and had got too sure a footing there, ever to be torn down,
    or prostrated by the fierce winds of persecution, the blasts of
    poverty, or the swollen waves of distress and tribulation. No;
    thank God, his house was built upon a _rock_--consequently it stood
    amid the contending elements, firm and unshaken.

    The life of our departed father has indeed been an eventful one,
    having to take a conspicuous part in the great work of the last
    days; being designated by the ancient prophets who once dwelt on
    this continent, as the father of him whom the Lord had promised
    to raise up in the last days, to lead His people Israel; and by
    a uniform consistent, and a virtuous course, for a long series
    of years, he has proved himself worthy of such a son, and such a
    family by whom he had the happiness of being surrounded in his
    dying moments; most of whom had the satisfaction of receiving his
    dying benediction.

    He was already in the wane of life, when the light of truth broke
    in upon the world, and with pleasure he hailed its benign and
    enlightening rays, and was chosen by the Almighty to be one of the
    witnesses to the Book of Mormon. From that time, his only aim was
    the promotion of truth--his soul was taken up with the things of
    the Kingdom; his bowels yearned over the children of men; and it
    was more than his meat and his drink to do the will of his Father,
    who is in heaven.

    By unceasing industry of himself and family, he had secured a
    home in the state of New York, where he no doubt expected, with
    every honest industrious citizen, to enjoy the blessings of peace
    and liberty. But when the principles of truth were introduced and
    the Gospel of Jesus Christ was promulgated by himself and family,
    friends forsook, enemies raged, and persecution was resorted to by
    wicked and ungodly men, insomuch that he was obliged to flee from
    that place, and seek a home in a more hospitable land.

    In Ohio he met with many kind and generous friends, and was kindly
    welcomed by the Saints; many of whom continue to this day, and can
    call to mind the various scenes which there transpired; many of
    which were of such a nature as not to be easily obliterated.

    While the House of the Lord was building he took great interest in
    its erection, and daily watched its progress, and had the pleasure
    of taking a part at the opening, and seeing it crowded by hundreds
    of pious worshipers. As the King of Israel longed for and desired
    to see the completion of the House of the Lord, so did he; and
    with him he could exclaim, "O Lord, I love the habitation of thine
    house, and the {194} place where thine honor dwelleth." To dwell
    in the house of the Lord, and to inquire in his temple, was his
    daily delight; and in it he enjoyed many blessings, and spent many
    hours in sweet communion with his heavenly Father. He has trod its
    sacred aisles, solitary and alone from mankind, long before the
    king of day has gilded the eastern horizon; and he has uttered his
    aspirations within its walls, when nature has been asleep. In its
    holy enclosures have the visions of heaven been opened to his mind,
    and his soul has feasted on the riches of eternity; and there under
    his teachings have the meek and humble been instructed, while the
    widow and the orphan have received his patriarchal blessings.

    There he saw the work spreading far and wide; saw the Elders of
    Israel go forth under his blessing--bore them up by the prayer of
    faith, and hailed them welcome when they again returned bringing
    their sheaves with them. There with his aged partner, he spent many
    happy days in the bosom of his family, whom he loved with all the
    tenderness of parental affection.

    Here I might enlarge, and expatiate on the "scenes of joy and
    scenes of gladness" which were enjoyed by our beloved Patriarch,
    but I shall pass on to an event which was truly painful and trying.

    The delightful scene soon vanished; the calm was soon succeeded by
    a storm and the frail bark was driven by the tempest and foaming
    ocean, for many who had once been proud to acknowledge him a
    father and a friend, and who sought counsel at his hands, joined
    with the enemies of truth, and sought his destruction; and would
    have rejoiced to see his aged and venerable form immured in a
    dungeon; but, thank God, this they were not suffered to do; he
    providentially made his escape, and after evading his enemies for
    some time, he undertook and accomplished a journey of a thousand
    miles, and bore up under the fatigue and suffering necessarily
    attendant on such a journey with patient resignation. After a
    journey of several weeks, he arrived in safety at Far West, in the
    bosom of the Church, and was cordially welcomed by the Saints, who
    had found an asylum in the rich and fertile county of Caldwell.

    There he, in common with the rest of the Saints, hoped to enjoy the
    privileges and blessings of peace. There, from the fertile soil and
    flowery meads, which well repaid the labor of the husbandman, and
    poured forth abundance for the support of the numerous herds which
    decked those lovely and wide-spread prairies, he hoped to enjoy
    uninterrupted, the comforts of domestic life.

    But he had not long indulged these pleasing anticipations before
    the delightful prospect again vanished: the cup of blessing which
    he began again to enjoy, was dashed from his aged lips; and the cup
    of sorrow filled to overflowing, was given him instead; and surely
    he drank it to the {195} very dregs; for not only did he see the
    Saints in bondage, treated with cruelty, and some of them murdered;
    but the kind and affectionate parent saw--and ah! how painful
    was the sight--two of his sons to whom he looked for protection,
    torn away from their domestic circles, from their weeping and
    distracted families, by monsters in the shape of men, who swore and
    threatened to kill them, and who had every disposition to imbrue
    their hands in their blood. This circumstance was too much for
    his agitated and now sinking frame to bear up under; and although
    his confidence in his God was great, and his conduct was that of
    a Christian and a Saint, yet he felt like a man and a parent. At
    that time his constitution received a shock from which it never
    recovered. Ah! yes there were feelings agitated in the bosom of
    our deceased friend at that time of no ordinary kind; feelings of
    painful anxiety, and emotion too great for his earthly tabernacle
    to contain without suffering a great and a sensible injury; and
    which from that time began to manifest itself.

    It would be unnecessary to trace him and his aged partner (who
    shared in all his sorrows and afflictions) from such a scene, as
    many of the Saints are knowing to the privations and sufferings
    which they, in common with the Church, endured while moving from
    that land of oppression; suffice it to say, he arrived in safety in
    Illinois, broken down in constitution and in health, and since then
    he has labored under severe afflictions and pain, while disease has
    been slowly but surely undermining his system.

    Whenever he had a short respite from pain, he felt a pleasure in
    attending to his patriarchal duties, and with cheerfullness he
    performed them; and frequently his labors have been more than his
    strength would admit of; but having great zeal for the cause of
    truth, he felt willing to be spent in the service of his God.

    For some time past he has been confined to his bed, and the time of
    is departure was near at hand. On Saturday evening last, a rupture
    of a blood vessel took place, when he vomited a large quantity
    of blood. His family were summoned to his bedside, it being now
    evident that he could not long survive.

    On Sunday he called his children and grandchildren around him,
    and like the ancient patriarchs gave them his final benediction.
    Although his strength was far gone, and he was obliged to rest at
    intervals, yet his mind was clear, perfectly collected, and calm
    as the gentle zephyrs. The love of God was in his heart, the peace
    of God rested upon him, and his soul was full of compassion and
    blessing.

    All the circumstances connected with his death, were calculated
    to lead the mind back to the time when an Abraham, an Isaac and a
    Jacob bid adieu to mortality, and entered into rest.

    {196} His death, like theirs, was sweet, and it certainly was
    a privilege indeed to witness such a scene; and I was forcibly
    reminded of the sentiment of the poet:

  The chamber where the good man meets his fate,
  Is privileged beyond the common walk of virtuous life.

    There were no reflections of a misspent life--no fearful
    forebodings of a gloomy nature in relation to the future; the
    realities of eternity were dawning, the shades of time were
    lowering; but there was nothing to terrify, to alarm or disturb
    his mind; no, the principles of the Gospel, which, "bring life and
    immortality to light," nobly triumphed in nature's final hour.
    These principles so long taught and cherished by our lamented
    friend, were honorably maintained to the last; which is not only a
    consolation to the immediate relatives, but to the Church at large.

    The instructions imparted by him will long be remembered by his
    numerous progeny, who will undoubtedly profit by the same, and
    strive to render themselves worthy of such a sire; and the whole
    Church will copy his examples, walk in his footsteps, and emulate
    his faith and virtuous actions, and commend themselves to his God
    and to their God.

    Notwithstanding his enemies frequently "shot at him, yet his bow
    abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong
    by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob," and his courage and
    resolution never forsook him.

    His anxiety for the spread of truth was great, and he lived to see
    great and important things accomplished. He saw the commencement
    of the work, small as a mustard seed, and with attention and deep
    interest he watched its progress; and he had the satisfaction of
    beholding thousands on this Continent, rejoicing in its truth, and
    heard the glorious tidings, that other lands were becoming heirs to
    the richest blessings.

    Under these circumstances, he could exclaim, like pious Simeon of
    old, "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine
    eyes have seen thy salvation."

    Although his spirit has taken its flight and his remains will
    soon mingle with their mother earth, yet his memory will long be
    cherished by all who had the pleasure of his acquaintance, and will
    be fresh and blooming when those of his enemies shall be blotted
    out from under heaven.

    May we, beloved friends, who survive our venerable Patriarch, study
    to prosecute those things which were so dear to his aged heart,
    and pray that a double portion of his spirit may be bestowed on
    us, {197} that we may be the humble instruments in aiding the
    consummation of the great work which he saw so happily begun;
    that when we have to stand before the bar of Christ, we may with
    our departed friend hear the welcome plaudit, "Come up hither, ye
    blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
    foundation of the world." Amen.

Footnotes:

1. The entry of the text is the only one made in the Prophet's
manuscript history for the 23rd of August, but "Uncle" John
Smith, brother of the Prophet's father, and formerly president of
Adam-ondi-Ahman stake of Zion, in Missouri, makes the following entry
in his journal:

"Attended meeting at Nashville. Joseph and Hyrum Smith present and a
large assembly of saints, who voted to commence building a city at
Nashville and a place of worship." Nashville, by the way, was situated
in Lee county, Iowa, on the Mississippi river, at the head of the Des
Moines Rapids, about three miles southeast of Montrose, eight miles
north of Keokuk. The Church had purchased twenty thousand acres of land
in this vicinity and surveyed out of it a townsite on which a number of
saints located.

2. Again from the journal of "Uncle" John Smith we learn that on the
30th day of August, the Prophet Joseph was in Nashville and preached on
"Eternal Judgment and the Eternal Duration of Matter."

3. Smithfield is noted for other historical incidents than being the
scene of John Rogers' martyrdom. It is an open space of nearly six
acres in London, England. It was formerly used as a market place, but
is now partially laid out in gardens. It was the scene of Bartholomew
Fair; William Wallace was executed there; it was the place of the
meeting of Wat Tyler and King Richard II, in 1380, when the former
was stabbed by the Mayor of London, and then dispatched by the King's
attendants. It was the scene of many martyrdoms.

4. John Rogers suffered martyrdom by being burnt at the stake in
Smithfield, on the 4th of February, 1555. He was the first victim
of what is known in history as the "Marian Persecution;" and which
conferred on England's Catholic queen the title of "Bloody Mary."
Archbishop Gardiner, however, is usually credited with being the prime
instigator of that persecution, though he died before it reached its
height, and not before he had shown symptoms of relenting. Cardinal
Pole though "naturally humane and gentle," shares the guilt of
sanctioning it; "but the chief agent was Bonner, bishop of London,
in whose diocese the majority of all the executions took place. * *
* * The total number of men, women and children who were burnt--for
even children were thrown into the flames and some at the very moment
of their birth"--is computed as follows: 1555, from February--72;
1556--94; 1557--79; 1558, from February to September--(when the
persecution closed), 39; making a total of 284. It was during this
persecution that Ridley and Latimer suffered. On the way to the
execution the latter, it is said, "with a keen quaintness which
adorns his sermons," uttered the words which fortunately became
prophetic--addressing himself to his companion--"Be of good comfort,
Master Ridley; play the man; we shall this day light such a candle, by
God's grace, in England, as I trust shall never be put out." (History
of England, by William Smith, p. 156).

5. Ginseng is a plant, the roots of which are highly esteemed as
medicine, being quite generally regarded as possessing the most
extraordinary virtues, and as a remedy for almost all diseases,
but particularly for exhaustion of body or mind. In China ginseng
is sometimes sold for its weight in gold. It was once introduced
in Europe, but was soon forgotten. It is a native plant of Chinese
Tartary, and grows from one to two feet in height. Its leaves are five
fingered and almost smooth. It is doubted by many botanists if this
species is really distinct from _phanx quinquefolium_, a common North
American plant, doubtless the species referred to in the text, the root
of which is now an article of export from North America to China, and
is used to some extent as a domestic medicine in the states west of
the Alleghanies, but which European and American medical practitioners
generally regard as almost worthless.

6. From that time on the Prophet of the Dispensation of the Fullness of
Times had no truer or more constant or faithful friend than his father.

7. This term, "High Priesthood," is often used in these annals--as it
is above--for High Priest. The intent of the above statement is to
say that "Father Smith,"--for so he was affectionately called by the
Saints--was ordained Patriarch and the President of the High Priests
in Kirtland. That he was not made President of the High Priesthood is
evident from the fact that the Prophet Joseph himself at that time was
President of the High Priesthood of the Church, a position to which
he was ordained at a Conference of High Priests in Amherst, Loraine
county, Ohio, in 1832 (see Church History, Vol. I, p. 243 and note.)
The Presidency of the High Priesthood carries with it the office of
President of the Church: "And again, the duty of the President of the
office of the High Priesthood is to preside over the whole Church, and
to be like unto Moses. Behold, here is wisdom, yea, to be a seer, a
revelator, a translator, and a Prophet, having all the gifts of God
which He bestows upon the head of the Church." (Doc. and Cov. sec. 107,
verses 91-9.)

{198}



Chapter XI.

Threatening Portents in the Actions of Missouri--General Conferences in
Nauvoo and England--The Doctrine of Priesthood.

_Tuesday, September 15, 1840_.

    "The governor of Missouri, after a silence of about two years, has
    at last made a demand on Governor Carlin of Illinois, for Joseph
    Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wight, Parley P. Pratt, Caleb
    Baldwin, and Alanson Brown, as fugitives from justice.

    "The demand it seems has been complied with by Governor Carlin,
    and an order issued for their apprehension; accordingly our place
    has recently received a visit from the sheriff for these men;
    but through the tender mercies of a kind Providence, who by His
    power has sustained, and once delivered them from the hands of the
    blood-thirsty and savage race of beings in the shape of men that
    tread Missouri's delightful soil; they were not to be found--as
    the Lord would have it, they were gone from home, and the sheriff
    returned, of course without them.

    "These men do not feel disposed to again try the solemn realities
    of mob law in that state; and a free and enlightened republic
    should respond against it, for Missouri has no claim on them, but
    they have claim on Missouri.

    "What right have they to demand of Governor Carlin, as fugitives
    from justice, men against whom no process had ever been found in
    that state--no, not so much as the form of a process? They were
    taken by a mob militia, and dragged from everything that was dear
    and sacred, and tried (without their knowledge) by a court martial,
    condemned to be shot, but this failing, they were forced into
    confinement, galled with chains, deprived of the comforts of life,
    and even that which was necessary to save life, then brought to a
    pretended trial, without even having a legal process served, and
    then deprived of the privilege of defense. They were taken by a
    mob, tried, condemned and imprisoned by the same, and this Missouri
    cannot deny.

    "What a beautiful picture Governor Boggs has presented to the
    {199} world, after driving twelve or fifteen thousand inhabitants
    from their homes, forcing them to leave the state under the pain
    of extermination, and confiscating their property, and murdering
    innocent men, women and children; then, because that a few made
    their escape from his murdering hand, and have found protection in
    a land of equal rights, so that his plans and designs have all been
    unfruitful, to that extent that he has caused 'Mormonism' to spread
    with double vigor; he now has the presumption to demand them back,
    in order that his thirst for innocent blood may yet be satiated.

    "He has no business with them; they have not escaped from justice,
    but from the hands of a cursed, infuriated, inhuman set, or race
    of beings who are enemies to their country, to their God, to
    themselves, and to every principle of righteousness and humanity.
    They loathe Christianity, and despise the people of God; they war
    against truth, and inherit lies; virtue they tread under their
    feet; while vice (with her ten thousand offspring) is their welcome
    associate; therefore, men on whom Missouri has no claim, she
    cannot, no, she never shall have." [1]

_Sunday, 20_.--Elder Willard Richards went to Preston, held a
conference, ordained five Elders, eleven Priests, eight Teachers, one
Deacon, and returned to Manchester same day.

    _Letter of Samuel Bent and George W. Harris to the
    Presidency--Reporting Labors_.

    Cincinnati, Sept. 23, 1840.

    _To the First Presidency and High Council of the Church of Jesus
    Christ of Latter-day Saints_:

    We gladly embrace this opportunity of conveying a few lines to
    you by Ebenezer Robinson, who we expect will leave this place for
    Nauvoo in a few days.

    Brother George W. Harris and myself have visited the several
    branches of the Church in Adams county, Pike county, Jacksonville,
    and Springfield. On our way we stopped at Terre Haute, and Pleasant
    Garden, Indiana. We found the brethren generally very willing and
    anxious to do all in their power to assist the Church in the great
    and glorious cause that we have engaged in respecting the printing
    of the several books in contemplation, but I am sorry to say I
    found them destitute of the means to relieve our present necessity.

    However, we have succeeded in obtaining several notes of hand from
    {200} different brethren in the state of Illinois, to the amount of
    about eighty-three dollars, which will come due on the first day of
    October next, and we have handed them over to Ebenezer Robinson,
    to be delivered to Joseph Smith, Jun., for collection. We expect
    Brother Robinson will arrive with them at the time they become due.

    We have obtained some money, which we have paid over to Brother
    Ebenezer Robinson. We have also given our obligations as agents for
    the Church, to Shepherd and Stearns to the amount of three hundred
    dollars, two hundred of which becomes due on the twenty-sixth day
    of November next, and the other one hundred on the twenty sixth day
    of December next, being the amount due Shepherd and Stearns for the
    stereotype plates.

    We have taken up the bond that Brother Brown gave for the wagon
    or carriage which he let Joseph Smith, Jun., have, and we have
    succeeded in procuring a horse and harness to put alongside of
    the other horse to make it easier for him. We got said horse and
    harness by contributions from the brethren at Dayton and West
    Milton, Ohio.

    Brother Ebenezer Robinson (we think) has been very economical,
    diligent, and persevering, and successful in the business whereupon
    he was sent. He has gained the confidence of the gentlemen with
    whom he has been transacting business in the city, and has done
    honor to the cause of Christ and His Church of Latter-day Saints.
    We can further say to you brethren, we think the course he has
    taken, and our united exertions with him, have established the
    credit of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in this
    place (I mean as to business transactions), to that extent that we
    can obtain any amount of paper, type, and other materials requisite
    to carry on the printing business to a large extent, and upon terms
    that will warrant our success.

    We therefore shall go on with renewed courage and zeal, trusting
    in the Lord to prepare the way before us, and we feel to ask your
    prayers that God may peradventure expand the minds of the Saints
    abroad, that they may be able to comprehend the magnitude of the
    work we so much desire to accomplish, which in all probability will
    induce them to donate with alacrity.

    Brother John E. Page is preaching with the manifestations of the
    Spirit and power in this place, and with considerable success.
    We think when Brother Page leaves the city of Cincinnati, the
    inhabitants thereof will be left without excuse for not receiving
    the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and his garments clear from their blood
    in the day of judgment.

    Accept our love and best wishes.

    Yours in the bonds of the New and Everlasting Covenant,

    Samuel Bent,

    George W. Harris.

    {201} _Letter of John E. Page to the Presidency--Reporting Progress
    of Palestine Mission_.

    Cincinnati, September 23, 1840.

    _To the President and Council of the Church of Jesus Christ of
    Latter-day Saints, and also to all the Saints Assembled in General
    Conference_:

    Your humble servant embraces with pleasure this opportunity to
    pen for your edification a few lines. I congratulate you upon
    the steady march and advancement of the cause of Christ, as [it]
    has fallen under my observation. Elder Hyde and myself have been
    treated with respect, and had the greatest attention paid us by
    the brethren and sisters; and by gentlemen and ladies of the first
    class in society, we have been made welcome very heartily to their
    dwellings and comforts of life. When we separate from them they
    grip our hands with tears standing full in their eyes, bidding
    farewell, and often leave something noble with us to help us on
    our mission; and a firm promise that they will duly reflect on the
    great things which we have told them. They ardently request us to
    send them some competent Elder to preach to them.

    Yes, dear brethren, the cause of truth is marching onward with
    unparalleled rapidity, and victory! Victory! will soon be the shout
    of all the faithful in Christ; and thank the Lord, thank the Lord,
    is the language of unworthy me, that I have lived to see 1840, with
    all its attendant evidences of the truth of the Book of Mormon, and
    the Book of Doctrine and Covenants.

    I must save a place in this communication to make some remarks
    concerning Brother Ebenezer Robinson. I can say, in truth and
    soberness, that he merits the esteem and confidence of the Saints
    and all good men for his diligence and economy while getting
    the Book of Mormon stereotyped, &c., here. The honest and frank
    course he has pursued towards the gentlemen with whom he has
    been concerned in business (viz., Messrs. Shepherd, Stearns, and
    others), has won their everlasting respect and esteem, judging from
    their own manifestations to me.

    Dear brethren and sisters, your humble servants, Orson Hyde and
    myself, sincerely solicit your special prayers, sealed with a
    hearty amen.

    Elder Hyde is truly a humble servant of the Lord, and a very
    agreeable companion in the ministry. Our hearts are one, our faith
    is one, and the strongholds of Satan quake before us. We desire
    to have grace to perform our mission, that we may return to our
    families and brethren with triumph and joy.

    I anticipate that Elder Hyde is in New York City. I am waiting to
    obtain a few copies of the third edition of the Book of Mormon. To
    {202} raise means is hard, yet we trust in the Lord. I shall go to
    Philadelphia as soon as possible.

    I have baptized thirteen in this city; many are believing, and some
    halting between two opinions; and have baptized in all since I
    started, eighty-four.

    I have had a vision from the Lord, which manifested the present
    state of the world respecting the Jews, Jerusalem, the remnant
    of Israel, and also the Gentile world. As hasty summer fruit, so
    is this nation; as a vineyard of grapes fully ripe, ready to be
    gathered for the press, so are all the nations of the earth.

    I want the conference to send some faithful and competent Elder to
    this place, to nurse the seed or word that has been sown here, and
    shall leave this matter with Ebenezer Robinson to lay before the
    conference.

    Elders Bent and Harris are here, and are using all their energies,
    both of mind and body, to fill their calling. I deem them amply
    qualified to discharge the function of their office, provided they
    keep humble.

    Dear brethren, remember me to my family, and pray for them;
    remember me to Sister Hyde, and also all of the wives of the Elders
    in particular, whose husbands are in the field. Tell them to pray
    for us. I hope the authorities of the Church will see that they are
    provided with food and raiment, that they may enjoy life with you.

    Yours in the bonds of the Covenant,

    John E. Page.

_Monday, 28_.

    _Extracts from Orson Hyde's Letter--Signs in the Heavens_.

    Burlington County, New Jersey.

    I left Elder Page at Cincinnati the latter part of August, and came
    on up the Ohio river as far as Wellsburgh, Virginia. I stopped with
    Father James. Here I preached twice, and baptized three persons;
    came on by stage and steamboats to Pittsburg; from thence took the
    canal to Leechburgh, where I stopped and preached to a small number
    of Saints, raised up by the instrumentality of Father Nickerson--in
    good spirits.

    As I left this place about nine o'clock in the morning, the
    most remarkable phenomenon occurred in the heavens that I ever
    witnessed. There appeared two bright and luminous bodies, one on
    the north and the other on the south of the sun; in length about
    ten yards, inclining to a circle resembling a rainbow, about fifty
    yards distant from the sun; apparently east about twenty-five
    yards, was a body of light as brilliant almost as the sun itself;
    and on the west, a great distance from the sun, {203} appeared a
    white semi-circle passing half way round the horizon, and another
    crossing it at right angles, exhibiting a scene of the sublimest
    kind. It was a great wonder to the passengers on board the boat.
    Put this with the fact that the Jews are gathering home, and that
    all Europe is in commotion and on the eve of breaking out in open
    hostilities; and also that the tree of liberty, which has long
    flourished in the republican soil of America, has been girdled,
    and her green foliage, which has shielded and protected the sons
    of oppression from the scorching rays of despotic power, already
    begins to wither like the accursed fig tree--and what language do
    these speak to the Saints! "Lift up your heads, for your redemption
    draweth near!" * * * * * *

    I came on, and met with the Saints in Chester county, Pennsylvania,
    laboring there about one week with Brother Barnes, where we added
    six to their number. I preached about one week in Philadelphia,
    and baptized twelve; came on to this place with Brothers Snow
    and Barnes, and held a two-days' meeting, at which sixteen were
    baptized. I shall return to Philadelphia in a few days, where I
    expect to meet Brother Page, and then, if the Lord will, after
    holding a few meetings in this country, we shall proceed on to New
    York, there to take ship and sail over the seas.

    Orson Hyde.

On the night of the 28th, Elder Heber C. Kimball had the following
dream, as related by himself:

    _Elder Heber C. Kimball's Dream_.

    Having great anxiety for the welfare of the small branch which
    we had raised in London, I retired to rest and had the following
    dream. I thought that we dug a well on high ground in order to
    obtain water, and after digging some considerable time, we came to
    an excellent spring; we then commenced to back it up, but before it
    was finished, we had occasion to leave for a short time and when
    we returned to complete it, we found it carefully filled up with
    sand, and all attempts to remove it proved unavailing, we thought
    it better to choose another spot on lower ground, where we were
    successful. When we returned to London, we experienced a perfect
    fulfillment of my dream--having to open a new preaching place at
    Barrett's Academy, King Square, Goswell Road, our former place
    being closed against us.

_Tuesday, 29_.--Elders Heber C. Kimball and George A. Smith left London
for the Manchester conference.

_Saturday, October 3_.

    {204} _Minutes of the General Conference of the Church of Jesus
    Christ of Latter-day Saints, held in Nauvoo, Hancock County,
    Illinois, Beginning October 3, 1840_.

    The conference was opened with prayer by President William Marks.
    President Joseph Smith was then unanimously called to the chair,
    and Robert B. Thompson appointed clerk.

    A letter from Elders Bent and Harris, and one from Elder John E.
    Page were then read by the clerk, which gave very satisfactory
    accounts of their mission.

    On motion, Resolved: That a committee be appointed to ordain such
    as have recommends to this conference for ordination, and that
    Jonathan H. Hale, Elisha H. Groves, Charles C. Rich, John Murdock,
    and Simeon Carter, compose said committee, and report their
    proceedings before the conference closes.

    The President arose and stated that there had been several
    depredations committed on the citizens of Nauvoo, and thought
    it expedient that a committee be appointed to search out the
    offenders, and bring them to justice.

    Whereupon it was Resolved: That Joseph Smith, Elias Higbee, William
    Marks, Vinson Knight, William Law, Charles C. Rich, and Dimick B.
    Huntington, compose said committee.

    On motion, Resolved: That Robert B. Thompson be appointed the
    General Church Clerk, in the room of George W. Robinson, who
    intends to remove to Iowa.

    It having been requested by Elder Page, that the conference would
    appoint an Elder to take charge of the church which he and Elder
    Hyde had raised up in Cincinnati, on motion, Resolved: That Elder
    Samuel Bennett be appointed to preside there.

    The president then arose and stated that it was necessary that
    something should be done with regard to Kirtland, so that it might
    be built up; and gave it as his opinion, that the brethren from
    the east might gather there, and also that it was necessary that
    some one should be appointed from this conference to preside over
    that stake. On motion, Resolved: That Elder Almon W. Babbitt be
    appointed to preside over the Church in Kirtland, and that he
    choose his own counselors.

    Conference adjourned for one hour.

    One o'clock p. m. Conference met pursuant to adjournment. An
    opportunity was given to the brethren who had any remarks to make
    on suitable locations for stakes of Zion. Elder H. W. Miller stated
    that it was the desire of a number of the brethren residing in
    Adams county, to have a stake appointed at Mount Ephrain in that
    county, and stated the advantages of the place for agricultural
    purposes.

    {205} On motion, Resolved: That a stake be appointed at Mount
    Ephraim, in Adams county.

    There being several applications for the appointment of stakes,
    it was Resolved: That a committee be appointed to organize stakes
    between this place and Kirtland, and that Hyrum Smith, Lyman Wight,
    and Almon W. Babbitt, compose said committee.

    The President then spoke of the necessity of building a "House of
    the Lord" in this place. Whereupon it was Resolved: That the Saints
    build a house for the worship of God, and that Reynolds Cahoon,
    Elias Higbee, and Alpheus Cutler be appointed a committee to build
    the same.

    On motion, Resolved: That a commencement be made ten days from this
    date, and that every tenth day be appropriated for the building of
    the house.

    President Hyrum Smith arose and stated that there were several
    individuals who, on moving to this place, had not settled with
    their creditors, and had no recommend from the branches of the
    churches where they had resided. On motion, Resolved: That those
    persons moving to this place, who do not bring a recommend, be
    disfellowshiped.

    John C. Bennett, M. D., then spoke at some length, on the
    oppression to which the Church had been subjected, and remarked
    that it was necessary for the brethren to stand by each other, and
    resist every unlawful attempt at persecution.

    Elder Lyman Wight then addressed the meeting. Adjourned till
    tomorrow morning.

_Sunday morning, October 4_.

    Conference met pursuant to adjournment, and was opened with prayer
    by Elder Almon W. Babbitt.

    The clerk was then called upon to read the report of the Presidency
    in relation to the city plat, after which the President made some
    observations on the status of the debts on the city plat, which
    will appear at the close of these conference minutes, and advised
    that a committee be appointed to raise funds to liquidated the
    same. On motion, Resolved: That William Marks and Hyrum Smith
    compose said committee.

    On motion, Resolved: That a committee be appointed to draft a bill
    for the incorporation of the town of Nauvoo, and other purposes.

    _Resolved_: That Joseph Smith, John C. Bennett, and Robert B.
    Thompson be said committee.

    _Resolved_: That John C. Bennett be appointed delegate, to urge the
    passage of said bill through the legislature.

    President Hyrum Smith then rose and gave some general instructions
    to the Church. Conference adjourned for one hour.

    {206} One o'clock p. m. Conference met pursuant to adjournment, and
    was opened with prayer by Elder John P. Greene.

    President Joseph Smith then rose and delivered a discourse on
    the subject of baptism for the dead, which was listened to with
    considerable interest, by the vast multitude assembled.

    Dr. John C. Bennett from the committee to draft a charter for the
    city, and for other purposes, reported the outlines thereof. On
    motion, Resolved: That the same be adopted.

    Elder Ebenezer Robinson then rose and gave an account of the
    printing of another edition of the Book of Mormon, and stated that
    it was now nearly completed, and that arrangements had been made
    for the printing of the hymn-book, Book of Doctrine and Covenants,
    &c.

    Conference adjourned to Monday morning.

_Monday morning, October 5_.

    Conference met pursuant to adjournment, and was opened with prayer
    by Elder Lyman Wight.

    Elder Robert B. Thompson, after a few preliminary remarks, read
    an article on the Priesthood, composed by President Joseph Smith,
    which will appear at the close of the conference minutes; after
    which Elder Babbitt delivered an excellent discourse on the same
    subject, at considerable length.

    Conference adjourned for one hour. During the intermission a large
    number was baptized.

    Two o'clock p. m. Conference met pursuant to adjournment. Elder
    Lyman Wight addressed the congregation on the subject of baptism
    for the dead, and other subjects of interest to the Church.

    The President then made some observations and pronounced his
    benediction on the assembly.

    Dr. John C. Bennett said that many persons had been accused of
    crime, and been looked upon as guilty, when on investigation it
    has been ascertained that nothing could be proved against them.
    Whereupon, on motion, it was Resolved: That no person be considered
    guilty of crime, unless proved so by the testimony of two or three
    witnesses.

    He next brought before the conference the treatment the Saints had
    experienced in Missouri, and wished to know whether the conference
    would take any further steps in relation to obtaining redress.
    On motion, resolved: That Elias Higbee and Robert B. Thompson be
    appointed a committee to obtain redress for the wrongs sustained in
    Missouri.

    The committee on ordinations reported that they had ordained
    thirty-nine to the ministry.

    {207} On motion, Resolved: That this conference be dismissed, and
    that the next conference be held on the 6th day of April next.

    Joseph Smith, President.

    Robert B. Thompson, Clerk.

The following is the article on Priesthood referred to in the
conference minutes:

    Priesthood.

    In order to investigated the subject of the Priesthood, so
    important to this, as well as every succeeding generation, I shall
    proceed to trace the subject as far as I possibly can from the Old
    and New Testaments.

    There are two Priesthoods spoken of in the Scriptures, viz., the
    Melchisedek and the Aaronic or Levitical. Although there are two
    Priesthoods, yet the Melchisedek Priesthood comprehends the Aaronic
    or Levitical Priesthood, and is the grand head, and holds the
    highest authority which pertains to the Priesthood, and the keys of
    the Kingdom of God in all ages of the world to the latest posterity
    on the earth, and is the channel through which all knowledge,
    doctrine, the plan of salvation, and every important matter is
    revealed from heaven.

    Its institution was prior to "the foundation of this earth, or
    the morning stars sang together, or the Sons of God shouted for
    joy," and is the highest and holiest Priesthood, and is after the
    order of the Son of God, and all other Priesthoods are only parts,
    ramifications, powers and blessings belonging to the same, and are
    held, controlled, and directed by it. It is the channel through
    which the Almighty commenced revealing His glory at the beginning
    of the creation of this earth, and through which He has continued
    to reveal Himself to the children of men to the present time, and
    through which He will make known His purposes to the end of time.

    Commencing with Adam, who was the first man, who is spoken of in
    Daniel as being the "Ancient of Days," or in other words, the
    first and oldest of all, the great, grand progenitor of whom it
    is said in another place he is Michael, because he was the first
    and father of all, not only by progeny, but the first to hold the
    spiritual blessings, to whom was made known the plan of ordinances
    for the salvation of his posterity unto the end, and to whom Christ
    was first revealed, and through whom Christ has been revealed
    from heaven, and will continue to be revealed from henceforth.
    Adam holds the keys of the dispensation of the fullness of times;
    i. e., the dispensation of all the times have been and will be
    revealed through him from the beginning to Christ, and from Christ
    to the end of all the dispensations that are to be {208} revealed.
    "Having made known unto us the mystery of His will, according to
    His good pleasure which He hath purposed in Himself: that in the
    dispensation of the fullness of times He might gather together in
    one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are
    on earth; even in him." (Ephesians, 1st chap., 9th and 10 verses).

    Now the purpose in Himself in the winding up scene of the last
    dispensation is that all things pertaining to that dispensation
    should be conducted precisely in accordance with the preceding
    dispensations.

    And again, God purposed in Himself that there should not be an
    eternal fullness until every dispensation should be fulfilled and
    gathered together in one, and that all things whatsoever, that
    should be gathered together in one in those dispensations unto
    the same fullness and eternal glory, should be in Christ Jesus;
    therefore He set the ordinances to be the same forever and ever,
    and set Adam to watch over them, to reveal them from heaven to man,
    or to send angels to reveal them. "Are they not all ministering
    spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of
    salvation?" (Hebrews, i, 14).

    These angels are under the direction of Michael or Adam, who acts
    under the direction of the Lord. From the above quotation we learn
    that Paul perfectly understood the purposes of God in relation
    to His connection with man, and that glorious and perfect order
    which He established in Himself, whereby he sent forth power,
    revelations, and glory.

    God will not acknowledge that which He has not called, ordained,
    and chosen. In the beginning God called Adam by His own voice. "And
    the Lord called unto Adam and said unto him, Where art thou? And
    he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid because
    I was naked, and hid myself." (See Genesis 3rd chap., 9, 10.) Adam
    received commandments and instructions from God: this was the order
    from the beginning.

    That he received revelations, commandments and ordinances at the
    beginning is beyond the power of controversy; else how did they
    begin to offer sacrifices to God in an acceptable manner? And if
    they offered sacrifices they must be authorized by ordination.
    We read in (Genesis, 4th chap., 4th), that Abel brought of the
    firstlings of the flock and the fat thereof, and the Lord had
    respect to Abel and to his offering. And, again, "By faith Abel
    offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which
    he obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his
    gifts; and by it he being dead, yet speaketh." (Hebrews xi:4).
    How doth he yet speak? Why he magnified the Priesthood which was
    conferred upon him, and died a righteous man, and therefore has
    become an angel of God by receiving his body from the dead, holding
    still the keys of his dispensation; and was sent down from heaven
    unto {209} Paul to minister consoling words, and to commit unto him
    a knowledge of the mysteries of godliness.

    And if this was not the case, I would ask, how did Paul know so
    much about Abel, and why should he talk about his speaking after he
    was dead? Hence, that he spoke after he was dead must be by being
    sent down out of heaven to administer.

    This, then, is the nature of the Priesthood; every man holding the
    Presidency of his dispensation, and one man holding the Presidency
    of them all, even Adam: and Adam receiving his Presidency and
    authority from the Lord, but cannot receive a fullness until Christ
    shall present the Kingdom to the Father, which shall be at the end
    of the last dispensation.

    The power, glory and blessings of the Priesthood could not continue
    with those who received ordination only as their righteousness
    continued; for Cain also being authorized to offer sacrifice, but
    not offering it in righteousness, was cursed. It signifies, then,
    that the ordinances must be kept in the very way God has appointed;
    otherwise their Priesthood will prove a cursing instead of a
    blessing.

    If Cain had fulfilled the law of righteousness as did Enoch, he
    could have walked with God all the days of his life, and never
    failed of a blessing. "And Enoch walked with God after he begat
    Methuselah 300 years, and begat sons and daughters, and all the
    days of Enoch were 365 years; and Enoch walked with God, and he was
    not, for God took him." (Gen. 5th chap., 22nd ver.) Now this Enoch
    God reserved unto Himself, that he should not die at that time,
    and appointed unto him a ministry unto terrestrial bodies, of whom
    there has been but little revealed. He is reserved also unto the
    Presidency of a dispensation, and more shall be said of him and
    terrestrial bodies in another treatise. He is a ministering angel,
    to minister to those who shall be heirs of salvation and appeared
    unto Jude as Abel did unto Paul; therefore Jude spoke of him (14,
    15 verses). And Enoch, the seventh from Adam, revealed these
    sayings: "Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousand of His Saints."

    Paul was also acquainted with this character, and received
    instructions from him. "By faith Enoch was translated, that he
    should not see death, and was not found, because God had translated
    him; for before his translation he had this testimony, that he
    pleased God; but without faith, it is impossible to please Him, for
    he that cometh to God must believe that He is, and that he is a
    revealer to those who diligently seek him." (Heb. 11, 5).

    Now the doctrine of translation is a power which belongs to this
    Priesthood. There are many things which belong to the powers of the
    Priesthood and the keys thereof, that have been kept hid from {210}
    before the foundation of the world; they are hid from the wise and
    prudent to be revealed in the last times.

    Many have supposed that the doctrine of translation was a doctrine
    whereby men were taken immediately into the presence of God, and
    into an eternal fullness, but this is a mistaken idea. Their
    place of habitation is that of the terrestrial order, and a place
    prepared for such characters He held in reserve to be ministering
    angels unto many planets, and who as yet have not entered into
    so great a fullness as those who are resurrected from the dead.
    "Others were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might
    obtain a better resurrection." (See Heb. 11th chap., part of the
    35th verse.)

    Now it was evident that there was a better resurrection, or else
    God would not have revealed it unto Paul. Wherein then, can it be
    said a better resurrection. This distinction is made between the
    doctrine of the actual resurrection and translation: translation
    obtains deliverance from the tortures and sufferings of the body,
    but their existence will prolong as to the labors and toils of the
    ministry, before they can enter into so great a rest and glory.

    On the other hand, those who were tortured, not accepting
    deliverance, received an immediate rest from their labors. "And I
    heard a voice from heaven, saying, Blessed are the dead who die
    in the Lord, for from henceforth they do rest from their labors
    and their works do follow them." (See Revelation, 14th chap., 13th
    verse).

    They rest from their labors for a long time, and yet their work is
    held in reserve for them, that they are permitted to do the same
    work, after they receive a resurrection for their bodies. But we
    shall leave this subject and the subject of the terrestrial bodies
    for another time, in order to treat upon them more fully.

    The next great, grand Patriarch [after Enoch] who held the keys
    of the Priesthood was Lamech. "And Lamech lived one hundred and
    eighty-two years and begat a son, and he called his name Noah,
    saying, this same shall comfort us concerning our work and the toil
    of our hands because of the ground which the Lord has cursed." (See
    Gen. 5th chap., 28th and 29th verses.) The Priesthood continued
    from Lamech to Noah: "And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh
    is before me, for the earth is filled with violence through them,
    and behold I will destroy them with the earth." (Gen. 6: 13.)

    Thus we behold the keys of this Priesthood consisted in obtaining
    the voice of Jehovah that He talked with him [Noah] in a familiar
    and friendly manner, that He continued to him the keys, the
    covenants, the power and the glory, with which he blessed Adam at
    the beginning; and the offering of sacrifice, which also shall
    be continued at the last time; for all the ordinances and duties
    that ever have been required by {211} the Priesthood, under
    the directions and commandments of the Almighty in any of the
    dispensations, shall all be had in the last dispensation, therefore
    all things had under the authority of the Priesthood at any former
    period, shall be had again, bringing to pass the restoration spoken
    of by the mouth of all the Holy Prophets; then shall the sons of
    Levi offer an acceptable offering to the Lord. "And he shall sit as
    a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of
    Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto
    the Lord." (See Malachi 3:3).

    It will be necessary here to make a few observations on the
    doctrine set forth in the above quotation, and it is generally
    supposed that sacrifice was entirely done away when the Great
    Sacrifice [_i. e_., the sacrifice of the Lord Jesus] was offered
    up, and that there will be no necessity for the ordinance of
    sacrifice in future; but those who assert this are certainly
    not acquainted with the duties, privileges and authority of the
    priesthood, or with the Prophets.

    The offering of sacrifice has ever been connected and forms a part
    of the duties of the Priesthood. It began with the Priesthood, and
    will be continued until after the coming of Christ, from generation
    to generation. We frequently have mention made of the offering of
    sacrifice by the servants of the Most High in ancient days, prior
    to the law of Moses; which ordinances will be continued when the
    Priesthood is restored with all its authority, power and blessings.

    Elijah was the last Prophet that held the keys of the Priesthood,
    and who will, before the last dispensation, restore the authority
    and deliver the keys of the Priesthood, in order that all the
    ordinances may be attended to in righteousness. It is true that
    the Savior had authority and power to bestow this blessing; but
    the sons of Levi were too prejudiced. "And I will send Elijah the
    Prophet before the great and terrible day of the Lord," etc., etc.
    Why send Elijah? Because he holds the keys of the authority to
    administer in all the ordinances of the Priesthood; and without the
    authority is given, the ordinances could not be administered in
    righteousness.

    It is a very prevalent opinion that the sacrifices which were
    offered were entirely consumed. This was not the case; if you read
    Leviticus, second chap., second and third verses, you will observe
    that the priests took a part as a memorial and offered it up before
    the Lord, while the remainder was kept for the maintenance of the
    priests; so that the offerings and sacrifices are not all consumed
    upon the altar--but the blood is sprinkled, and the fat and certain
    other portions are consumed.

    These sacrifices, as well as every ordinance belonging to the
    Priesthood, will, when the Temple of the Lord shall be built, and
    the sons of Levi be purified, be fully restored and attended to in
    all their powers, ramifications, and blessings. This ever did and
    ever will exist when the {212} powers of the Melchisedic Priesthood
    are sufficiently manifest; else how can the restitution of all
    things spoken of by the holy Prophets be brought to pass? It is not
    to be understood that the law of Moses will be established again
    with all its rites and variety of ceremonies; this has never been
    spoken of by the Prophets; but those things which existed prior to
    Moses' day, namely, sacrifice, will be continued.

    It may be asked by some, what necessity for sacrifice, since the
    Great Sacrifice was offered? In answer to which, if repentance,
    baptism, and faith existed prior to the days of Christ, what
    necessity for them since that time? The Priesthood has descended
    in a regular line from father to son, through their succeeding
    generations. (See Book of Doctrine and Covenants). [2]

    Report Of The Presidency. [3]

    The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
    Saints would respectfully report--

    That they feel rejoiced to meet the Saints at another General
    Conference, and under circumstances as favorable as the present.
    Since our settlement in Illinois we have for the most part been
    treated with courtesy and respect, and a feeling of kindness and
    of sympathy has generally been manifested by all classes of the
    community, who, with us, deprecate the conduct of those men whose
    dark and blackening deeds are stamped with everlasting infamy and
    disgrace. The contrast between our past and present situation is
    great. Two years ago mobs were threatening, plundering, driving
    and murdering the Saints. Our burning houses lighted up the canopy
    of heaven. Our women and children, houseless and destitute, had
    to wander from place to place to seek a shelter from the rage of
    persecuting foes. Now we enjoy peace, and can worship the God of
    heaven and earth without molestation, and expect to be able to go
    forward and accomplish the great and glorious work to which we have
    been called.

    Under these circumstances we feel to congratulate the Saints
    of the Most High, on the happy and pleasing change in their
    circumstances, condition and prospects, and which those who shared
    in the perils and distress, undoubtedly appreciate; while prayers
    and thanksgivings daily ascend to that God who looked upon our
    distresses and delivered us from danger and death, and whose hand
    is over us for good.

    From the unpropitious nature of the weather, we hardly expected to
    behold so many of our friends on this occasion; in this, however,
    we are agreeably disappointed, which gives us strong assurance that
    the Saints are as zealous, untiring, and energetic as ever, in the
    great work of the last days; and gives us joy and consolation, and
    greatly {213} encourages us, while contending with the difficulties
    which necessarily lie in our way. Let the brethren ever manifest
    such a spirit, and hold up our hands, and we must, we will go
    forward; the work of the Lord shall roll forth, the Temple of the
    Lord be reared, the Elders of Israel be encouraged, Zion be built
    up, and become the praise, the joy, and the glory of the whole
    earth, and the song of praise, glory, honor, and majesty to Him
    that sitteth upon the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever,
    shall reverberate from hill to hill, from mountain to mountain,
    from island to island, and from continent to continent, and the
    kingdoms of this world become the kingdom of our God and His Christ.

    We are glad indeed to know that there is such a spirit of union
    existing throughout the churches, at home and abroad, on this
    continent, as well as on the islands of the sea; for by this
    principle, and by a concentration of action, shall we be able to
    carry into effect the purposes of our God.

    From the Elders abroad we receive the most cheering accounts.
    Wherever the faithful laborer has gone forth weeping, sowing the
    seed of truth, he has returned with joy, bringing his sheaves with
    him; and the information we receive from all quarters is that the
    laborers are few and that the harvest is great. Many wealthy and
    influential people have embraced the Gospel, so that not only
    will the poor rejoice in that they are exalted, but the rich in
    that they are made low. The calls to the Southern States are
    indeed great; many places which a short time ago would think it
    a disgrace to give shelter to a "Mormon," on account of the many
    misrepresentations which were abroad, now desire to hear an Elder
    of the Church of the Latter-day Saints.

    On the islands of the sea, namely, Great Britain, there continues
    to be a steady flow of souls into the Church. Branches have been
    organized in many large and populous cities, and the whole land
    appears to be thirsting for the pure streams of knowledge and
    salvation.

    The Twelve have already printed a new edition of the hymn-book, and
    they issue a monthly periodical in that land. Several families have
    already arrived here from England, and a number more are on their
    way to this place, and are expected this fall.

    If the work rolls forth with the same rapidity it has heretofore
    done, we may soon expect to see flocking to this place, people
    from every land and from every nation; the polished European, the
    degraded Hottentot, and the shivering Laplander; persons of all
    languages, and of every tongue, and of every color; who shall with
    us worship the Lord of Hosts in His holy temple and offer up their
    orisons in His sanctuary.

    It was in consideration of these things, and that a home might be
    provided for the Saints, that induced us to purchase the present
    city for a place of gathering for the Saints, and the extensive
    tract of land on {214} the opposite side of the Mississippi.
    Although the purchase at the time, and under the peculiar
    circumstances of the Church, appeared to many to be large and
    uncalled for; yet from what we now see, it is apparent to all that
    we shall soon have to say, "This place is too straight, give us
    room that we may dwell." We therefore hope that the brethren who
    feel interested in the cause of truth, and desire to see the work
    of the gathering of Israel roll forth with power, will aid us in
    liquidating the debts which are now owing, so that the inheritances
    may be secured to the Church, and which eventually will be of great
    value.

    The good spirit which is manifested on this occasion, the desire to
    do good, and the zeal for the honor of the Church, inspires us with
    confidence that we shall not appeal in vain, but that funds will be
    forthcoming on this occasion, sufficient to meet the necessities of
    the case.

    It is with great pleasure that we have to inform the Church that
    another edition of the Book of Mormon has been printed, and
    which is expected on from Cincinnati in a short time; and that
    arrangements are making for printing the Book of Doctrine and
    Covenants, hymn-book, &c.; so that the demand which may exist for
    these works will soon be supplied.

    In conclusion we would say, brethren and sisters, be faithful, be
    diligent, contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the
    Saints; let every man, woman and child realize the importance of
    the work, and act as if success depended on his individual exertion
    alone; let all feel an interest in it, and then consider they live
    in a day, the contemplation of which animated the bosoms of kings,
    Prophets, and righteous men thousands of years ago--the prospect
    of which inspired their sweetest notes, and most exalted lays, and
    caused them to break out in such rapturous strains as are recorded
    in the Scriptures; and by and by we will have to exclaim, in the
    language of inspiration--

  The Lord has brought again Zion,
  The Lord hath redeemed His people Israel.

_Tuesday, October 6_.

    _Minutes of a General Conference in England_.

    Minutes of a general conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of
    Latter-day Saints, held at Carpenter's Hall, Manchester, Tuesday,
    the 6th day of October, 1840, it being the first day of the seventh
    month of the eleventh year of the Church; when the following
    officers of the Traveling High Council were present, viz.: Elders
    Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, Willard Richards,
    Wilford Woodruff, and George A. Smith; other officers: High Priests
    5, Elders 19, Priests 28, Teachers 4, and Deacons 2.

    The meeting being called to order at 10 o'clock by Elder Brigham
    Young, {215} it was moved by Elder Young, seconded by Elder Woodruff,
    that Elder Orson Pratt be president off the conference, which was
    carried unanimously. Elder George Walker was chosen clerk.

    After singing, and prayer by the president, the following
    statistical report was read:

     Conferences and Branches.                                         Members. Elders. Priests. Teachers. Deacons.
     Preston Conference (including all the branches in the care of     665      18      23       11        2
     Elders Melling and Withnall) as represented by Elder Melling
     Potteries were represented by Elder Alfred Cordon                 248      9       32       9         9
     Birmingham Branch, represented by Elder Alfred Cordon             4
     West Bromwich, represented by Elder Alfred Cordon                 21               3        1
     Clitheroe Conference, represented by Thomas Smith                 295      10      11       9         3
     Herefordshire, &c., represented by Thoedore Curtis                1007     19      78       15        1
     Glasgow, and regions round about, represented by Samuel Mulliner  492      8       7        5         3
     Hilsboro Branch, Ireland, represented by Theodore Curtis          5
     Isle of Man Branch, represented by Hiram Clark                    6
     Liverpool Conference, represented by Priest William Mitchell      100      3       4        2         1
     London Branch, represented by Elder Heber C. Kimball              11               2
     Macclesfield, represented by Priest I. Brown                      71               6        2         2
     Altrincham Conference, (including Middlewich, Nortwich, and       82       1       3        3         3
     Peover,) represented by Elder William Berry
     Bedford Branch, represented by Elder Brigham Young                36       1       1
     Stockport, represented by Elder Martin Littlewood                 140      2       5        2         1
     Bolton, represented by Priest Barroes                             61               2        1
     Duckinfield, represented by Elder Albiston                        76       1       3        1
     Edinburg Conference, represented by Orson Pratt                   43               2
     Pendlebury Branch, represented by Henry Royle                     36               2
     Eccles, represented by Brother E. Leather                         13               3
     Whitefield, represented by Elder Walker Johnson                   39       1       2        3
     Ratcliffe, represented by John Allen                              16       1       2
     Brampton, represented by Thomas Tweddle                           40       1       1        1
     Alston, represented by John Sanders                               39       2       1        2
     Newcastle-upon-Tyne, represented by Amos Fielding                 6                2        1
     Manchester, represented by Brigham Young                          364      4       27       6         1
     Ancrum, represented by Orson Pratt                                9

    The president brought before the conference the subject of
    ordinations, and after various observations thereon, it was
    proposed by Elder George A. Smith, that for the future, ordinations
    be not attended to, except by the Traveling High Council or under
    such restrictions as they may adopt in reference thereto. Elder
    Young spoke on the subject of conferences, and also with respect
    of restricting ordination; and after taking into consideration the
    great expense attendant upon holding general conferences, and the
    inconvenience experienced by members attending them, suggested,
    that for the future, general conferences should in a great measure
    be done away with, or restricted to the Traveling High Council to
    hold conferences at such places and times as they may think proper.

    {216} The meeting adjourned at 12 o'clock.

    At 2 o'clock the meeting opened with prayer, after which Elder
    Kimball spoke on the subject of Elders taking upon themselves the
    responsibility of ordaining officers in this Church; after pointing
    out the evils that might result therefrom, he proceeded to treat
    upon the duty of members towards those who preside over them in
    the Lord, and respecting the members administering to the temporal
    necessities of those whose calling it is to labor amongst them in
    spiritual things.

    Moved by Elder Willard Richards, seconded by Elder Thomas Smith,
    and carried unanimously, that all ordinations be confined to or
    under the regulations of the Traveling High Council.

    Elder Young called the attention of the conference to the case of
    Emma Bolton, a sister from the Potteries, who had conducted herself
    disorderly. Elder Johnson and others spoke of several cases of
    improper conduct on her part; after which it was moved by Elder
    Young, seconded by Elder Kimball, and carried unanimously, that
    Emma Bolton be cut off from the Church.

    The president [of the conference, Elder Orson Pratt], then called
    the attention of the conference to a letter from Isaac Brown and
    other officers of the Church at Macclesfield, concerning Elder
    Heath, and also to some half a dozen charges preferred by the said
    Isaac Brown, James Galley, Edward Horrocks, and John Horrocks,
    against the said Samuel Heath, for several items of misconduct, and
    neglecting the duties of his office; to all of which charges Elder
    Heath pleaded not guilty. The complainants then entered into proof
    of the several items, to which Elder Heath replied by stating that
    the charges against him were in consequence of a misunderstanding,
    &c. The proceedings opened a wide field for instruction from Elder
    Young, followed by the president, who recommended the parties
    to become reconciled to each other, stating that he did not
    consider the charges preferred against Elder Heath sufficiently
    substantiated to withdraw fellowship from him; when it was moved
    and seconded, that no further proceeding be taken on this subject;
    carried unanimously.

    The conference then adjourned till 7 o'clock. p. m.

    At 7 o'clock the meeting was opened with prayer.

    The president having made such preliminary remarks as the
    importance of the subject called forth, proceeded to call upon
    those who were willing to volunteer their services to labor in the
    vineyard of the Lord, when the officers gave their names as follows:

    High Priests--Hiram Clark, Thomas Smith, Alfred Cordon, Thomas
    Kington, Orson Pratt, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard
    Richards, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith.

    Elders--George D. Watt, John Parkinson, David Moss, Martin {217}
    Littlewood, William Parr, Samuel Heath, John Sanders, Theodore
    Curtis, Henry Royle, Thomas Tweddle, John Leigh, Amos Fielding,
    Thomas Richardson.

    Priests--William Snailam, William Speakman, John Needham, James
    Mahon, Frederick Cook, Robert Crooks, William Mitchell, William
    Black, Robert Williams, William Jones, Thomas Pollitt, Richard
    Steele, John Burns, Joseph Knowles, Richard Benson, John Wyche,
    William Roylance, Joseph Street, Joseph White.

    Moved, seconded, and carried, that Elder George D. Watt go to
    Edinburgh; Elder Alfred Cordon to Birmingham, and also take charge
    of the Staffordshire Potteries Conference, and that John Burns,
    Priest, go with him.

    Elder Thomas Kington to take charge of the Herefordshire
    Conferences as heretofore, also Garway; and William Snailam and
    Joseph Knowles, Priests, to accompany him.

    Robert Crooks, Priest, to go to Bolton; Thomas Richardson, Elder,
    and John Needham, Priest, to go to Herefordshire; Elder Hiram Clark
    to go to the Isle of Man; Elder Thomas Tweddle to Glasgow; Elder
    John Sanders to labor at Alston, and go to Carlisle as soon as
    practicable.

    Elder Amos Fielding to go to Newcastle-upon-Tyne; Elder John
    Parkinson to Greenock; Elder Henry Royle and Frederick Cook,
    Priest, to Cly in Flintshire; William Mitchell, Priest, to Leeds;
    Elder Thomas Smith to remain at Clitheroe; Elder John Leigh, and
    James Mahon, Priest, to go to Arden, Cheshire, and Joseph White
    and Richard Steele, Priests, to labor under the direction of Elder
    Cordon.

    Elder John Smith to be ordained High Priest, to take charge of
    the church in Manchester and the regions round about: Elder Peter
    Melling to take charge of the church as heretofore, in connection
    with Elder H. Withnall; and John Wyche, Priest, to go into
    Staffordshire, and labor under the direction of Alfred Cordon.

    Moved and seconded, that the remainder of the officers who have
    volunteered, be left to the Traveling High Council to dispose of,
    and appoint to such places as they may judge expedient; carried.

    Moved and seconded, that in consequence of there not being time to
    transact all the business of this conference, the ordination of
    officers be left to the Traveling High Council to ordain from time
    to time such members as they may consider requisite; carried.

    Elder Young then addressed the meeting on the propriety of
    establishing a fund for the support and clothing of such members
    as may from time to time be called out to labor in the vineyard,
    and whose circumstances may require that their necessities may be
    administered unto. The president then addressed the meeting on
    the same subject, {218} and pointed out the difference between
    preaching for money and the Elders having their necessities
    ministered unto, while they are called to labor "without taking
    thought for the morrow." Elder Richards followed upon the same
    subject; also Elder Kimball; after which Elder Young moved, that
    wherever a branch of the Church is established, two members be
    appointed to receive the weekly voluntary contributions of the
    members, for promoting the spread of the Gospel, and the same to be
    disposed of by the vote of the church in council with the Twelve
    Apostles; seconded by Elder George A. Smith, and carried.

    The minutes were then read and accepted, and the conference
    adjourned _sine die_.

    Orson Pratt, President,

    George Walker, Secretary.

_Thursday, 8_.

    _Minutes of Council of the Twelve in England_.

    Minutes of a Council of the Twelve, viz., Brigham Young, Heber
    C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith, and
    Willard Richards; also Hiram Clark, and Reuben Hedlock, High
    Priests, at the house of Willard Richards, No. 1, Chapman Street,
    Manchester; Brigham Young presiding.

    Moved by Elder Kimball, that Elder Willard Richards take charge
    of the _Millennial Star_, seconded and carried. Voted that our
    publishing office be removed to London as soon as circumstances
    will permit; and that Elders Hedlock and Curtis go where they
    please to labor.

    Willard Richards, Clerk.

Footnotes:

1. The foregoing is an editorial in the _Times and Seasons_ for
September, 1840.

2. A discourse on the same subject to the Twelve will be found in vol.
iii, p. 385, _et seq_.

3. This is the report referred to in the conference minutes.

{219}



CHAPTER XII.

Progress of the Work in Great Britain--The Saints at Kirtland Reproved
for Their Course During the Missouri Persecutions--The Prophet's
Address to the Twelve and Saints in Great Britain.

_Saturday, October 10_.--Elder George A. Smith returned to London, and
was soon followed by Elder Woodruff.

[Sidenote: Charges against Oliver Walker.]

David Fulmer preferred a charge against Oliver Walker "for reporting
certain slanderous stories of a fallacious and calumniating nature,
calculated to stigmatize, and raise a persecution against the Church
and individuals in it, in this place, [Nauvoo], and for other acts
of unchristianlike conduct," before the High Council at Nauvoo. The
defendant pleaded that "he was not prepared to meet the charge, it
being too indefinite." Council adjourned till next day.

_Sunday, 11_.--High Council met according to adjournment. The charge
against Oliver Walker was taken up, and the following substituted for
the first charge:

    _Minutes of the High Council_.

    _To the High Council of the Church of Jesus Christ at Nauvoo_:

    For and in behalf of said Church, I prefer a charge against Elder
    Oliver Walker, for several different offenses hereinafter set
    forth, as said to be by him done, performed, said, and committed,
    as well as various duties omitted, all of which was done at
    different times, periods, places, and seasons, subsequent to
    September 1st, A. D. 1838, to-wit.:

    For a general course of procedure, of acts, doings, and words,
    and suggestions by him, the said Elder Oliver Walker, done,
    performed, said, spoken, hinted at, and suggested, both directly
    and indirectly, and {220} as calculated to be derogatory to the
    character of the heads and leaders of the Church, and extremely
    injurious and hurtful to the upbuilding, welfare, being, and
    advancement of the same, namely, for fleeing from, quitting, and
    deserting the society, ranks, and needs of his brethren, in times
    of difficulty with, and danger from their enemies, "the mob;"
    restraining from the use of his brethren, his influence, efforts,
    and needful assistance, at such times of need; as also for joining
    with, and strengthening the hands, will, evil pursuits, and designs
    of the mob, and Gentile enemies of the Church, by expressions,
    hints, and suggestions of wavering and dubious nature, respecting
    the faith and order of the Church, and of the professed calling,
    qualifications, proceedings, &c., of Joseph Smith, Jun., as a Seer,
    Prophet, and one called to bring to light the fullness of the
    Gospel, &c., in these last days.

    Likewise for advancing ideas, notions, or opinions, that the
    different orders or sects, namely, Methodists and others, could by
    a pursuit in their faith, order, and pursuits, as readily obtain
    every celestial attainment and Gospel advantage, as they could by
    embracing and pursuing the system brought forth by Joseph Smith,
    Jun., in these last days.

    And moreover for suggesting within the last six months, at Alton,
    Nauvoo, intermediate and adjacent places, that in the Church at
    Nauvoo there did exist a set of pilferers, who were actually
    thieving, robbing, plundering, taking and unlawfully carrying away
    from Missouri, certain goods and chattels, wares and property;
    and that the act and acts of such supposed thieving, &c., was
    fostered and conducted by the knowledge and approbation of the
    heads and leaders of the Church, viz., by the Presidency and High
    Council; all of which items set forth as aforesaid, together with
    any and all corroborating acts, doings, hints, expressions, and
    suggestions in any way belonging to, or connected with, any or all
    of the aforesaid accusations, he, the said Oliver Walker, is hereby
    notified to prepare to defend in said trial.

    Dated October 11, 1840, Nauvoo.

    David Fulmer.

    Walker pleaded that he was not prepared to defend himself, and the
    trial was deferred at his request till April conference.

    _Letter of Heber C. Kimball et al. to Messrs. Ebenezer Robinson and
    Don Carlos Smith--Reporting Affairs in the British Mission_.

    Manchester, England, October 12, 1840.

    _Messrs. Ebenezer Robinson, and Don Carlos Smith_:

    Dear Brethren:--We left Manchester immediately after the July {221}
    conference, for the purpose of visiting the city of London. We
    visited the churches which lay on our route through Staffordshire,
    Herefordshire, Worcestershire, and Gloucestershire; and we had many
    interesting meetings, baptizing and confirming daily, as we passed
    along. We baptized forty in one day; many new doors were opening,
    and all things indicated a short work in England.

    The last meeting we held among the Saints while on this journey,
    was in a field in Leigh, Gloucestershire, on the 16th of August.
    We had an interesting time; we baptized fifteen, and ordained one
    Elder and two Priests. Two Methodist priests came twelve miles to
    hear; we baptized them after the first sermon, and confirmed and
    ordained them at the same time, and sent them to preach the Gospel.
    We parted with the Saints there on the 17th, went to Cheltenham,
    (five miles), and spent the night. There were several Saints in
    that place.

    On the 18th we took coach and rode forty miles, through a level
    farming country, something like Illinois prairie; we passed through
    Oxfordshire, leaving the Oxford University a little upon our left.
    This university consists of twenty colleges endowed, and five
    halls not endowed; and is considered the largest and most noted
    university in the world. We then took the railroad and traveled
    seventy miles, had a splendid view of Windsor Castle as we passed
    along. We landed at the London terminus of the Great Western
    Railway at 4 o'clock in the evening. From thence we took coach and
    rode a few miles into the city; we walked over London Bridge, and
    called upon Mr. Allgood, 19 King Street, Borough. Mrs. Allgood is
    sister to Elder Theodore Turley's wife; she treated us kindly, gave
    us such refreshments as we needed, and directed us to lodgings in
    the neighborhood, where we spent the night.

    After which we immediately commenced our researches through this
    great metropolis, for the honest in heart and the meek of the
    earth. We first commenced by visiting the ministers and preachers
    of the various orders, and requested the privilege of delivering
    our message unto the people in their churches and chapels; but of
    course you will not be astonished when we inform you that they
    denied us this privilege, and rejected our testimony.

    We went to and fro through the city of London, from day to day,
    endeavoring to get some door open whereby we could warn the
    people and search out the honest in heart; when on diligent
    search we found the whole city given to covetousness, (which is
    idolatry), priestcraft, tradition, superstition, and all manner
    of abominations, wickedness and uncleanness; and all doors closed
    against us.

    We did not hesitate to stand in the midst of the streets, and,
    Jonah like, cry repentance unto the inhabitants of that mighty
    city--the {222} metropolis of England--the pride and glory of
    Britain--the boast of the Gentiles, and the largest commercial city
    in the world--containing over one million five hundred thousand
    souls, who are ripening in iniquity and preparing for the wrath of
    God; and like the ox going to the slaughter, know not the day of
    their visitation.

    We shall long remember standing together in the midst of that
    people, and bearing a message which will prove a savor of life unto
    life, or of death unto death, not only unto them, but unto all
    those unto whom the sound of the everlasting Gospel shall come;
    even unto the whole world; and the judgment of the great day shall
    manifest the truth of it unto all nations. And it will ever sweeten
    the memory of that eventful period of our lives, to know that our
    labors, on that occasion, were not in vain; but we were enabled
    through toil, labor, diligent search, perseverance, and the great
    mercy of God, to find some of the blood of Ephraim--a few honest
    souls who were willing to receive and obey the Gospel; and that we
    were enabled to lay the foundation of a work in the city of London,
    which will not be removed until the city is warned, so that they
    will be left without excuse; and the Saints gathered out to stand
    in holy places, while judgment works. Until that time, the seed
    which we have sown there, will bring forth fruit, and the fruit
    will redound to the honor and glory of God.

    We have baptized eleven only, in the city of London, but through
    the faith and the mercy of God, we ere long expect a harvest of
    souls in that place; but we are willing to acknowledge, that in
    our travels, either in America or Europe, we have never before
    found a people, from whose minds we have had to remove a greater
    multiplicity of objections, or combination of obstacles, in order
    to excite an interest in the subject and prepare the heart for the
    reception of the word of God, than in the city of London.

    While conversing with the common people concerning the Gospel, we
    found their highest attainments to be, "Why, I go to church or
    chapel and get my children christened, what more is necessary?"
    When we conversed with the learned, we found them too wise to be
    taught, and too much established in the traditions of their fathers
    to expect any change in the last days. While conversing with the
    ministers of the various orders of the day, upon the principles of
    the Gospel, they would inform us that the ancient order of things
    was done away, and no longer needed; and some of them had preached
    forty years the good old religion, and God was with them, and they
    needed no more revelation, or healing the sick, or anything as
    manifest in the days of the Apostles, for we can get along without
    them in this day of refinement, light and knowledge.

    When we arose to preach unto the people repentance, and baptism
    {223} for the remission of sins, the cry of "Baptist, Baptist,"
    would be rung in our ears. If we spoke of the Church and body of
    Christ being composed of Prophets, and Apostles; as well as other
    members, "Irvingites, Irvingites," would immediately dash into the
    mind. If in the midst of our remarks, we even for once suffered the
    saying to drop from our lips, "The testimony of Jesus is the spirit
    of prophecy," "O, you belong to Johanna Southcote," would be heard
    from several places at once. If we spoke of the second coming of
    Christ, the cry would be, "Aitkenites." If we made mention of the
    Priesthood, they would call us "Catholics." If we testified of the
    ministering of angels, the people would reply, "The Irvingites have
    their angels, and even the Duke of Normandy is ready to swear that
    he has the administering of angels every night."

    These salutations, in connection with a multitude of others, of a
    similar nature, continued to salute our ears from day to day, until
    we were about ready to conclude that London had been such a perfect
    depot of the systems of the nineteenth century, that it contained
    six hundred three score and six different gods, gospels, redeemers,
    plans of salvation, religions, churches, commandments, (essential
    and non-essential), orders of preaching, roads to heaven and to
    hell; and that this order of things had so affected the minds of
    the people, that it almost required a horn to be blown from the
    highest heavens, in order to awaken the attention of the people,
    and prepare their minds to candidly hear and receive the doctrine
    of one Gospel, one faith, one baptism, one Holy Ghost, one God, and
    one plan of salvation, and that, such as Christ and the Apostles
    preached.

    But notwithstanding this, we do not feel discouraged concerning a
    work being perfected in London, but firmly believe that many souls
    will embrace the fullness of the Gospel there, though it will be
    through faith, diligence, perseverance, and prayer.

    Having spent twenty-three days together in this first mission
    in the metropolis, and the time drawing near for our October
    conference, Elder Woodruff left the city on the 10th of September
    for the purpose of attending several conferences. He attended the
    Bran Green and Gadfield Elm conference, held in Worcester on the
    14th of September, and also the Froomes Hill conference, held in
    Herefordshire on the 21st of September. At these two conferences,
    he heard represented, 40 branches of the Church, containing
    1,007 members, and 113 officers, viz., 19 Elders, 78 Priests, 15
    Teachers, and 1 Deacon; the whole of whom had received the fullness
    of the Everlasting Gospel, and been baptized in less than seven
    months in that part of the vineyard which he first opened in the
    month of March; and the work is still progressing very rapidly
    throughout that region; and among the number baptized {224} there
    have not been much less than one hundred preachers of various sects.

    He also attended the conference in the Staffordshire Potteries,
    which met at Hanley on the 28th of September; where were
    represented 231 members, 9 Elders, 32 Priests, 9 Teachers, and 9
    Deacons; most of whom received the work since our arrival there
    last winter and spring. While he was attending these conferences,
    Elders Kimball and George A. Smith continued their labors in London
    until the first of October, at which time we met together again in
    Staffordshire, and enjoyed each other's company while journeying
    together to Manchester, where the quorum of the Traveling High
    Council, with many Elders and Saints had the privilege of once more
    sitting in a general conference together, on the 6th of October in
    the Carpenter's Hall, where we heard represented 3,636 Saints, and
    383 official members.

    At the July conference there were 2,513 Saints, and 256 official
    members, making an increase in three months of 1,113 Saints and 127
    official members, besides over 200 Saints, including many Elders,
    Priests, Teachers and Deacons, who have emigrated to America; which
    would make over 1,300 additions to the Church in Europe during the
    last three months, and over two thousand since our conference in
    Preston on the 15th of April; which representation at that time was
    1,671 Saints, and 132 official members.

    Thus you see the Lord hath given us an increase, and blessed the
    labors of the servants of God universally in this land, for which
    we feel thankful; and our constant prayer to God is that His
    kingdom may roll forth, that the messengers bearing the everlasting
    Gospel may be diligent, meek, and humble, not weary in well doing,
    but waiting with patience for their reward, which lies at the end
    of the race, that their joy may be full.

    Heber C. Kimball,

    Wilford Woodruff,

    George A. Smith.

_Saturday, 17_.--A conference was held in Philadelphia, Elder Orson
Hyde presiding; 896 members were represented, including 24 Elders, 11
Priests, 6 Teachers, 5 Deacons, in Pennsylvania, New York City, New
Jersey, and vicinity.

[Sidenote: Remarkable Visions by Orson Pratt.]

Parley P. Pratt and family arrived in Manchester, and resumed the
editorial labors of the _Star_. Brother Orson Pratt has recently
published a pamphlet, entitled "An interesting account of several
Remarkable Visions, and of the late Discovery {225} of Ancient American
Records," comprising 31 pages giving a brief sketch of the rise of the
Church.

_Monday, 19_.

    _Letter of Joseph and Hyrum Smith to the Saints in
    Kirtland--Reproving the Saints for Neglect of their Brethren and
    Sisters During the Missouri Persecutions_.

    Nauvoo, Hancock County, Illinois,

    October 19th, 1840.

    _To the Saints in Kirtland, Ohio_:

    Dear beloved brethren in the kingdom and patience of Jesus
    Christ:--We take this opportunity of informing you that we yet
    remember the Saints scattered abroad in the regions of Kirtland,
    and feel interested in their welfare as well as in that of the
    Saints at large. We have beheld with feelings peculiar to ourselves
    the situation of things in Kirtland and the numerous difficulties
    to which the Saints have been subjected, by false friends as well
    as open enemies.

    All these circumstances have more or less engaged our attention
    from time to time. We likewise must complain of the brethren who
    are in office and authority in the stake of Kirtland, for not
    writing to us, and making known their difficulties and their
    affairs from time to time, so that they might be advised in matters
    of importance to the well being of said stake; but above all, for
    not sending one word of consolation to us while we were in the
    hands of our enemies, and thrust into dungeons. Some of our friends
    from various sections sent us letters which breathed a kind and
    sympathetic spirit, and which made our afflictions and sufferings
    endurable. All was silent as the grave [from Kirtland]; no feelings
    of sorrow, sympathy, or affection [was expressed] to cheer the
    heart under the gloomy shades of affliction and trouble through
    which we had to pass.

    Dear brethren, could you realize that your brethren were thus
    circumstanced, and were to bear up under the weight of affliction
    and woe which was heaped upon them by their enemies, and you stand
    unmoved and unconcerned! Where were the bowels of compassion?
    Where was the love which ought to characterize the Saints of the
    Most High? Did those high born and noble feelings lie dormant,
    or were you insensible to the treatment we received? However, we
    are disposed to leave these things to God, and to futurity, and
    feel disposed to forget this coldness on the part of the Saints
    in Kirtland, and to look to the future with more pleasure than
    while we contemplated the past; and shall by the assistance of our
    heavenly Father, take such steps as we think best {226} calculated
    to promote the interests of the Saints, and for the promotion of
    truth and righteousness, and the building up of the kingdom is
    these last days.

    The situation of Kirtland was brought before the general
    conference, held at this place on the 3rd instant, when it was
    resolved that Elder Almon W. Babbitt should be appointed to preside
    over the stake of Kirtland, and that he be privileged to choose his
    own counselors. We therefore hope that the Saints will hold up the
    hands of our beloved brother, and unite with him in endeavoring to
    promote the interests of the kingdom.

    It has been deemed prudent to advise the eastern brethren who
    desire to locate in Kirtland, to do so; consequently you may
    expect an increase of members in your stake, who probably will be
    but young in the faith, and who will require kind treatment. We
    therefore hope the brethren will feel interested in the welfare of
    the Saints, and will use all their endeavors to promote the welfare
    of the brethren who may think proper to take up their residence in
    that place.

    If you will put away from your midst all evil speaking, backbiting,
    and ungenerous thoughts and feelings: humble yourselves, and
    cultivate every principle of virtue and love, then will the
    blessings of Jehovah rest upon you, and you will yet see good and
    glorious days; peace will be within your gates, and prosperity in
    your borders; which may our heavenly Father grant in the name of
    Jesus Christ, is the prayer of yours in the bonds of the covenant,

    Joseph Smith,

    Hyrum Smith.

    An Epistle of the Prophet to the Twelve.

    _To the Traveling High Council and Elders of the Church of Jesus
    Christ of Latter-day Saints in Great Britain_:

    Beloved Brethren:--May grace, mercy, and peace rest upon you
    from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Having several
    communications lying before me from my brethren the Twelve, some
    of which ere this have merited a reply, but from the multiplicity
    of business which necessarily engages my attention, I have delayed
    communicating with you to the present time.

    Be assured, beloved brethren, that I am no disinterested observer
    of the things which are transpiring on the face of the whole earth;
    and amidst the general movements which are in progress, none is
    of more importance than the glorious work in which you are now
    engaged; consequently I feel some anxiety on your account, that you
    may by your virtue, faith, diligence and charity commend yourselves
    to one another, {227} to the Church of Christ, and to your Father
    who is in heaven; by whose grace you have been called to so holy
    a calling; and be enabled to perform the great and responsible
    duties which rest upon you. And I can assure you, that from the
    information I have received, I feel satisfied that you have not
    been remiss in your duty; but that your diligence and faithfulness
    have been such as must secure you the smiles of that God whose
    servant you are, and also the good will of the Saints throughout
    the world.

    The spread of the Gospel throughout England is certainly pleasing;
    the contemplation of which cannot but afford feelings of no
    ordinary kind, in the bosom of those who have borne the heat and
    burden of the day; and who were its firm supporters and strenuous
    advocates in infancy, while surrounded with circumstances the most
    unpropitious, and its destruction threatened on all hands; like the
    gallant bark that has braved the storm unhurt, spreads her canvas
    to the breeze, and nobly cuts her way through the yielding wave,
    more conscious than ever of the strength of her timbers, and the
    experience and capability of her captain, pilot, and crew.

    It is likewise very satisfactory to my mind, that there has been
    such a good understanding between you, and that the Saints have so
    cheerfully hearkened to council, and vied with each other in this
    labor of love, and in the promotion of truth and righteousness.
    This is as it should be in the Church of Jesus Christ; unity is
    strength. "How pleasing it is for brethren to dwell together
    in unity!" Let the Saints of the Most High ever cultivate this
    principle, and the most glorious blessings must result, not only
    to them individually, but to the whole Church--the order of the
    kingdom will be maintained, its officers respected, and its
    requirements readily and cheerfully obeyed.

    Love is one of the chief characteristics of Deity, and ought to
    be manifested by those who aspire to be the sons of God. A man
    filled with the love of God, is not content with blessing his
    family alone, but ranges through the whole world, anxious to bless
    the whole human race. This has been your feeling, and caused you
    to forego the pleasures of home, that you might be a blessing to
    others, who are candidates for immortality, but strangers to truth,
    and for so doing, I pray that heaven's choicest blessings may rest
    upon you.

    Being requested to give my advice respecting the propriety of your
    returning in the spring, I will do so willingly. I have reflected
    on the subject some time, and am of the opinion that it would be
    wisdom in you to make preparations to leave the scene of your
    labors in the spring. Having carried the testimony to that land,
    and numbers having received it, the leaven can now spread without
    your being obliged to stay.

    Another thing--there have been whisperings of the Spirit that {228}
    there will be some agitations, excitements, and trouble in the
    land in which you are now laboring. I would therefore say, in the
    meantime be diligent: organize the churches, and let everyone stand
    in his proper place, so that those who cannot come with you in the
    spring, may not be left as sheep without a shepherd.

    I would likewise observe, that inasmuch as this place has been
    appointed for the gathering of the Saints, it is necessary that it
    should be attended to in the order that the Lord intends it should.
    To this end I would say, that as there are great numbers of the
    Saints in England who are extremely poor, and not accustomed to
    the farming business, who must have certain preparations made for
    them before they can support themselves in this country, therefore
    to prevent confusion and disappointment when they arrive here,
    let those men who are accustomed to make machinery, and those who
    can command capital, though it be small, come here as soon as
    convenient, and put up machinery, and make such other preparations
    as may be necessary, so that when the poor come on, they may have
    employment to come to. This place has advantages for manufacturing
    and commercial purposes, which but very few can boast of; and
    the establishing of cotton factories, foundries, potteries, &c.,
    would be the means of bringing in wealth, and raising it to a very
    important elevation.

    I need not occupy more space on this subject, as its reasonableness
    must be obvious to every mind.

    In my former epistle I told you my mind respecting the printing of
    the Book of Mormon, hymn-book, &c. I have been favored by receiving
    a hymn-book from you, and as far as I have examined it, I highly
    approve of it, and think it to be a very valuable collection. I am
    informed that the Book of Mormon is likewise printed, which I am
    glad to hear, and should be pleased to hear that it was printed
    in all the different languages of the earth. You can use your own
    pleasure respecting the printing of the Doctrine and Covenants. If
    there is a great demand for it, I have no objections, but would
    rather encourage it.

    I can say, that as far as I have been made acquainted with your
    movements, I am perfectly satisfied that they have been in wisdom;
    and I have no doubt, but that the Spirit of the Lord has directed
    you; and this proves to my mind that you have been humble, and your
    desires have been for the salvation of your fellow man, and not
    for your own aggrandizement, and selfish interests. As long as the
    Saints manifest such a disposition, their counsels will be approved
    of, and their exertions crowned with success.

    There are many things of much importance, on which you ask counsel,
    but which I think you will be perfectly able to decide upon, as
    you are more conversant with the peculiar circumstances than I am;
    and I {229} feel great confidence in your united wisdom; therefore
    you will excuse me for not entering into detail. If I should see
    anything that is wrong, I would take the privilege of making known
    my mind to you, and pointing out the evil.

    If Elder Parley P. Pratt should wish to remain in England some
    time longer than the rest of the Twelve, he will feel himself at
    liberty to do so, as his family are with him, consequently his
    circumstances are somewhat different from the rest; and likewise
    it is necessary that someone should remain who is conversant with
    the rules and regulations of the Church, and continue the paper
    which is published. Consequently, taking all these things into
    consideration, I would not press it upon Brother Pratt to return in
    the spring.

    I am happy to inform you that we are prospering in this place,
    and that the Saints are more healthy than formerly; and from the
    decrease of sickness this season, when compared with the last, I am
    led to the conclusion that this must eventually become a healthy
    place. There are at present about 3,000 inhabitants in Nauvoo,
    and numbers are flocking in daily. Several stakes have been set
    off in different parts of the country, which are in prosperous
    circumstances.

    Provisions are much lower than when you left. Flour is about $4
    per barrel. Corn and potatoes about 25 cents per bushel; and other
    things in proportion. There has been a very plentiful harvest
    throughout the Union.

    You will observe, by the _Times and Seasons_, that we are about
    building a temple for the worship of our God in this place.
    Preparations are now making; every tenth day is devoted by the
    brethren for quarrying rock, &c. We have secured one of the most
    lovely situations for it in this region of country. It is expected
    to be considerably larger than the one in Kirtland, and on a more
    magnificent scale, and which will undoubtedly attract the attention
    of the great men of the earth.

    We have a bill before the legislature for the incorporation of
    the city of Nauvoo, and for the establishment of a seminary of
    learning, and other purposes--which I expect will pass in a short
    time.

    You will also receive intelligence of the death of my father; which
    event, although painful to the family and to the Church generally,
    yet the sealing testimony of the truth of the work of the Lord was
    indeed satisfactory. Brother Hyrum succeeds him as Patriarch of the
    Church, according to his last directions and benedictions. [1]

    {230} Several persons of eminence and distinction in society have
    joined the Church and become obedient to the faith; and I am happy
    to inform you that the work is spreading very fast upon this
    continent. Some of the brethren are now in New Orleans, and we
    expect a large gathering from the south. I have had the pleasure of
    welcoming about one hundred brethren who came with Brother Turley;
    the remainder I am informed stayed in Kirtland, not having means to
    get any further. I think that those who came here this fall, did
    not take the best possible route, or the least expensive. Most of
    the brethren have obtained employment of one kind or another, and
    appear tolerably well contented, and seem disposed to hearken to
    counsel.

    Brothers Robinson and Smith lately had a letter from Elders
    Kimball, Smith and Woodruff, which gave us information of the
    commencement of the work of the Lord in the city of London, which
    I was glad to hear. I am likewise informed that Elders have gone
    to Australia and to the East Indies. I feel desirous that every
    providential opening of the kind should be filled, and that you
    should, prior to your leaving England, send the Gospel into as many
    parts as you possibly can.

    Beloved brethren, you must be aware in some measure of my feelings,
    when I contemplate the great work which is now rolling on, and
    the relationship which I sustain to it, while it is extending to
    distant lands, and thousands are embracing it. I realize in some
    measure my responsibility, and the need I have of support from
    above, and wisdom from on high, that I may be able to teach this
    people, which have now become a great people, the principles of
    righteousness, and lead them agreeably to the will of Heaven; so
    that they may be perfected, and prepared to meet the Lord Jesus
    Christ when He shall appear in great glory. Can I rely on your
    prayers to our heavenly Father on my behalf, and on all the prayers
    of all my brethren and sisters in England, (whom having not seen,
    yet I love), that I may be enabled to escape every stratagem of
    Satan, surmount every difficulty, and bring this people to the
    enjoyment of those blessings which are reserved for the righteous?
    I ask this at your hands in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.

    Let the Saints remember that great things depend on their
    individual exertion, and that they are called to be co-workers with
    us and the Holy Spirit in accomplishing the great work of the last
    days; and in consideration of the extent, the blessings and glories
    of the same, let {231} every selfish feeling be not only buried,
    but annihilated; and let love to God and man predominate, and
    reign triumphant in every mind, that their hearts may become like
    unto Enoch's of old, and comprehend all things, present, past and
    future, and come behind in no gift, waiting for the coming of the
    Lord Jesus Christ.

    The work in which we are unitedly engaged is one of no ordinary
    kind. The enemies we have to contend against are subtle and well
    skilled in maneuvering; it behooves us to be on the alert to
    concentrate our energies, and that the best feelings should exist
    in our midst; and then, by the help of the Almighty, we shall go
    on from victory to victory, and from conquest to conquest; our
    evil passions will be subdued, our prejudices depart; we shall
    find no room in our bosoms for hatred; vice will hide its deformed
    head, and we shall stand approved in the sight of heaven, and be
    acknowledged the sons of God.

    Let us realize that we are not to live to ourselves, but to God; by
    so doing the greatest blessings will rest upon us both in time and
    in eternity.

    I presume the doctrine of "baptism for the dead" has ere this
    reached your ears, and may have raised some inquiries in your minds
    respecting the same. I cannot in this letter give you all the
    information you may desire on the subject; but aside from knowledge
    independent of the Bible, I would say that it was certainly
    practiced by the ancient churches; and St. Paul endeavors to prove
    the doctrine of the resurrection from the same, and says, "Else
    what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead
    rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead?"

    I first mentioned the doctrine in public when preaching the funeral
    sermon of Brother Seymour Brunson; and have since then given
    general instructions in the Church on the subject. The Saints have
    the privilege of being baptized for those of their relatives who
    are dead, whom they believe would have embraced the Gospel, if they
    had been privileged with hearing it, and who have received the
    Gospel in the spirit, through the instrumentality of those who have
    been commissioned to preach to them while in prison.

    Without enlarging on the subject, you will undoubtedly see its
    consistency and reasonableness; and it presents the Gospel of
    Christ in probably a more enlarged scale than some have imagined
    it. But as the performance of this rite is more particularly
    confined to this place, it will not be necessary to enter into
    particulars; at the same time I always feel glad to give all the
    information in my power, but my space will not allow me to do it.

    We had a letter from Elder Hyde, a few days ago, who is in New
    Jersey, and is expecting to leave for England as soon as Elder Page
    {232} reaches him. He requested to know if converted Jews are to go
    to Jerusalem or to come to Zion. I therefore wish you to inform him
    that converted Jews must come here.

    Give my kind love to all the brethren and sisters, and tell them I
    should have been pleased to come over to England to see them, but I
    am afraid that I shall be under the necessity of remaining here for
    some time; therefore I give them a pressing invitation to come and
    see me.

    I remain, dear brethren, yours affectionately,

    Joseph Smith.

Footnotes:

1. The last "directions and benedictions" of the Patriarch Joseph
Smith, Sen., here referred to, are stated by "Mother Lucy Smith" in her
book, "History of the Prophet Joseph" as follows:

"My son Hyrum, I seal upon your head your patriarchal blessing, which I
placed upon your head before, for that shall be verified. In addition
to this, I now give you my dying blessing. You shall have a season of
peace, so that you shall have sufficient rest to accomplish the work
which God has given you to do. You shall be as firm as the pillars
of heaven unto the end of your days. I now seal upon your head the
patriarchal power, and you shall bless the people. This is my dying
blessing upon your head in the name of Jesus. Amen."--_History of the
Prophet Joseph Smith_, p. 266.

{233}



Chapter XIII.

Introduction of the Gospel in the Isle of Man--The Nauvoo Charter.

_Wednesday, October 21, 1840_.--Elder Lorenzo Snow arrived in
Manchester, England, from Nauvoo.

_Thursday, 22_.--The committee appointed by the general conference of
the Church at Nauvoo on the 3rd inst., (my brother Hyrum presiding)
organized a Stake at Lima this evening, by appointing Isaac Morley,
president; John Murdock and Walter Cox, his counselors; also a Bishop's
Court composed of Gardner Snow, Clark Hulet and Henry Dean, with James
C. Snow, clerk.

_Friday, 23_.--Gardner Snow was ordained Bishop under the hands of
Hyrum Smith.

_Sunday, 25_.--The committee organized a Stake at Quincy. The
presidency were Daniel Stanton, Stephen Jones and Ezra T. Benson; the
latter was ordained a High Priest; also bishop and counselors, George
W. Crouse, Azariah Dustin, and Sylvester B. Stoddard.

_Tuesday, 27_.--The committee organized a Stake called Mount Hope, at
the steam mills, Columbus, Adams county. President and counselors were
Abel Lamb, Sherman Gilbert and John Smith. Bishop and counselors, were
Daniel A. Miller, Isaac Clark, and John Allen; Simeon J. Comfort, clerk.

At Freedom Stake, near Payson, Adams county, Henry W. Miller, Duncan
McArthur, and William Tenney were appointed to preside. Bishop and
counselors, Matthew Leach, Horra Kimball, and Jacob Foutz.

_Wednesday 28_.--[On this date a long communication {234} was sent to
the editors of the _Times and Seasons_ signed by Heber C. Kimball,
Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith, detailing their visit to various
places in London, but as the communication does not in any way bear
upon the incidents of the history of the Church, it is thought
unnecessary to publish the letter _in extenso_. The following paragraph
from the letter, however, it is thought should be preserved, because
it refers to the liberty the Elders of the Church incidentally enjoyed
while engaged in the ministry; and also because it breathes that spirit
of liberty in the pursuit of knowledge characteristic of the work of
God in the last days.--Editors.]

    We consider it perfectly consistent with our calling, with reason
    and revelation that we should form a knowledge of kingdoms and
    countries whether at home or abroad, whether ancient or modern,
    whether of things past or present or to come; whether it be in
    heaven, earth or hell, air or seas; or whether we obtain this
    knowledge by being local or traveling, by study or by faith, by
    dreams or by visions, by revelation or by prophecy, it mattereth
    not unto us; if we can but obtain a correct [view of] principles,
    and knowledge of things as they are, in their true light, past,
    present and to come. It is under such a view of things that we are
    endeavoring to avail ourselves of every opportunity in our travels
    among the nations of the earth, to record an account of things as
    they pass under our observation.

_Thursday, 29_.--Elder Woodruff preached twice in London, and baptized
three.

_Friday, 30_.--Elder Lorenzo Snow had a discussion with Mr. Barker, a
Methodist minister, at Hill Top, near Birmingham, and baptized two.

_Sunday, 31_.--I copy the following from the _Manx Liberal_ of this
date:

    Mormonism in the Isle of Man.

    _To the Editor of the Manx Liberal_:

    Sir--I feel rather surprised and chagrined that the modern
    delusion, viz., "Mormonism," should have made such rapid strides
    in this town, hitherto considered exempt from the many systems of
    irreligious creeds which abound in England, America, and elsewhere.
    I had thought that {235} the powerful and argumentative addresses
    of the dissenting ministers would have checked such a gross piece
    of imposition in its infancy, and thus prevented the great mass of
    our town's people from becoming dupes of designing knaves, "and
    being led away by every wind of doctrine." Above all, I imagined
    the two pamphlets issued by that holy, religious and devout man of
    God, Mr. Hays, Wesleyan minister, (to which connection I have the
    happiness and honor to belong) would have been quite sufficient
    to prove the fallacy of such a system, and prevent its further
    spread. But, sir, alas! alas! the case is quite the reverse;
    numbers continually flock to the Wellington room, and listen with
    eagerness to the principles there advocated. The members of our
    society (Methodists) seem to be most conspicuous in sanctioning and
    promoting this vile and abominable doctrine.

    Oh, sir, the result to our connection will be dreadful! the havoc
    tremendous; just think of the majority of our _leading_ and
    intelligent men aiding and abetting a cause of this description!
    Oh, sir, lamentable and heart-rending to witness the beaming
    countenances, and smiles of approbation displayed recently at
    Taylor's meeting! I could enumerate a host of our members who
    regularly attend those anti-Christian meetings; but I will just
    mention, with your permission, the names of a few who attended one
    of the last meetings. (Here followed a list of names.)

    O! Mr. Editor! I quake for the consequence; such a wholesale
    conversion to Mormonism was never before witnessed in any town or
    country. What will become of our society? What will become of our
    class meetings? What will become of our brethren in the faith? And
    above all, what will become of poor Mr. Hays [1] that nice and
    humble man, who so nobly stood forward to expose the errors of the
    Mormon system; God bless him and preserve him from want! But, Mr.
    Editor, what makes the case worse is, that a rumor is prevalent
    that all these pious men are to be baptized! That is duly immersed
    in the salt water of Douglas Bay, by that abominable creature,
    Taylor! Surely, there must be something enchanting about the vile
    man. Immersion! (my hand shakes while I write) and in winter, too!
    Oh, sir! the thought chills my very soul; surely this American
    dipper intends to drown them; he can have no other object in view,
    therefore, brethren of the Methodist society, beware! Drowning is
    not to be envied, and that too in your sins. Besides, what would
    the venerable John Wesley, (if he {236} were alive) say to such
    conduct? What will the conference say? And what will the world say?
    I leave these questions to yourselves to answer. In conclusion,
    brethren, I recommend you to read, mark, learn and inwardly digest
    the things which belong to your eternal peace, and listen no longer
    to the follies of men.

    A Staunch Wesleyan.

    Duke Street, Douglas, 29th Oct.

_Sunday, November 1, 1840_.--The committee organized a Stake,
Geneva, Morgan county, Illinois, and called it Geneva Stake;
presidents--William Bosley, Howard S. Smith, and Samuel Fowler.
Bishop's Court--Gardner Clark, Moses Clare, and David Orton.

Elder Levi Richards arrived in Manchester.

_Tuesday, 3_.--The English bombarded St. Jean D'Acre, during which a
powder magazine exploded, killing over two thousand men.

_Thursday, 5_.--The committee organized a Stake of the Church at
Springfield; presidents--Edwin P. Merriam, Isaac H. Bishop, and Arnold
Stephens. Bishop's Court--Abraham Palmer, Henry Stephens, and Jonathan
Palmer.

_Monday, 9_.--Elder George A. Smith received counsel to leave London
and go to Staffordshire for his health, as he had injured his lungs by
preaching in the streets, so that he discharged considerable blood from
them.

_Tuesday, 10_.--Elder Smith took leave of Elder Woodruff and traveled
to Birmingham, met Elder Alfred Cordon, preached and baptized five in
the evening.

[Sidenote: Opposition to the Work in England.]

_Thursday, 12_.--The _Weekly Dispatch_, England, having published a
sarcastic article against the Saints in that country, and blaming the
Bishop of Gloucester, and his tithe-fattened clergy for allowing the
"Mormons" to delude and baptize five hundred in his Diocese, Elder
Wilford Woodruff replied to this, but the _Dispatch_ refused to publish
his reply.

_Saturday, 21_.--Elders Young, Kimball and Richards, visited the Church
at Bolton.

{237} _Thursday, 26_.--Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and
George A. Smith preached to the Saints in Hanley this day, and on the
27th at Stoke-upon-Trent.

_Saturday, 28_.--Elders Young and Kimball left for London.

Elders Elias Higbee and Robert B. Thompson, the committee appointed at
the October Conference, wrote a petition to Congress for the redress
of the grievances of the Latter-day Saints in Missouri, setting forth
their wrongs and sufferings, in substance the same as my petition in
connection with Elias Higbee and Sidney Rigdon, of the 28th day of
November, 1839.

_Thursday, December 3_.--Elders Young, Kimball and Woodruff visited the
tower of London, the Horse Armory, Jewel Room and the Thames Tunnel.

_Friday, 4_.--Elders Young and Woodruff visited Buckingham Palace and
Westminster Abbey.

[Sidenote: Excommunication of Sidney Roberts.]

There was a conference in New York City, Elder Orson Hyde presiding.
The revelations of Elder Sidney Roberts were objected to, which were
that a certain brother must give him a suit of clothes, and a gold
watch, the best that could be had, also his saluting the sisters with
holy kiss. Elder Roberts justified himself in these things. Much good
counsel was given him, but he said he knew the revelations he had
received were from God, and would make no confession; consequently the
conference cut him off, and demanded his license, which he refused to
give up.

Elder John Taylor has been preaching and baptizing for some time in the
Isle of Man, where the work is now progressing.

_Saturday, 5_.--Elder Brigham Young writes as follows:

    _Letter of Brigham Young to the Presidency, Detailing Movements of
    the Mission in England_.

    No. 40, Ironmonger Row, St. Luke's, December 5th, 1840.

    Beloved Brethren--I have just returned from a walk with Brothers
    Kimball and Woodruff. We have only been as far as St. Paul's and
    {238} returned by Smithfield Market about three miles. Brother
    Kimball and myself had fine weather for our journey here; it was a
    beautiful day that we left Macclesfield for Burslem. We found the
    brethren in Macclesfield in good spirits, and in a good state as
    to appearance. They appear to be well suited with Brother James
    Galley; I think he will be a useful man in this kingdom. We found
    Brother George A. Smith in Burslem, not in the best of health. He
    is like the rest of us, the climate does not agree with him; he is
    affected with a bleeding at the lungs. We stayed with him at the
    Potteries. I preached two evenings. The Church is in a good state;
    some of the members have a pretty hard time of it. Brother Smith
    will stay there for the present.

    Saturday, 28th, left for the next stopping place in Grets Green,
    where we spent the Sabbath. On Saturday evening we called to see
    Sister Roden, Father Patrick's daughter; she was very glad to see
    us, and wanted we should stay all night. Her husband was very
    kind to us, and bid us or other Elders welcome to his house at
    any time. We could not stay; took tea with them, and agreed to
    send Elder Lorenzo Snow there if he could come; blessed them, and
    left them. I preached in the morning to the Saints in Grets Green,
    stayed afternoon meeting, and then walked to Birmingham; was very
    tired; heard Elder Snow preach; he is a nice young man, I think.
    Brother Kimball also spoke to the people after Brother Snow had
    got through. We found Brother Robert Williams here; he opened the
    meeting; he seems to be full of the Spirit.

    On Monday at 12 o'clock, Brother Kimball and myself took the
    railway. Brother Williams started on foot for London. We arrived
    here on Monday evening about six o'clock; found Brother Woodruff
    well and in good spirits. We have been pretty busy since we have
    been here.

    Brigham Young.

A great part of the city of Messina, Sicily, was this day destroyed
by an earthquake. Such was the force of the first shock that the
inhabitants of the town were buried in an instant beneath the ruins.

_Sunday, 6_.--Elders Young and Kimball preached in Barratt's Academy,
London, and administered the sacrament in the evening.

[Sidenote: Elder Taylor's Defense of the Work.]

_Monday, 7_.--Elder John Taylor issued his third pamphlet in defense
of the truth, against the attacks of the Rev. Robert Hays, Wesleyan
Minister, Douglas, Isle of Man; the three containing thirty-five pages
of closely printed matter, {239} which are a complete expose of the
corruptions of the Wesleyan priesthood, and a clear illustration of the
truth of the Latter-day work.

Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Wilford Woodruff, visited
the Anatomical Department of the College of Surgeons, London.

_Wednesday, 9_.--Elders Young and Kimball visited St. Paul's Cathedral,
the Monument, London and Southwark Bridges and also the British Museum.

_Thursday, 10_.--Elder Levi Richards left Manchester for Herefordshire.

_Sunday, 13_.--I attended the High Council at my office. Robert D.
Foster was on trial for lying, slandering the authorities of the
Church, profane swearing, etc. Witness was examined in part and trial
adjourned to the 20th.

_Monday, 14_.--Ebenezer Robinson and Don Carlos Smith dissolved
co-partnership. The _Times and Seasons_ is to be continued by Don
Carlos Smith.

_Wednesday, 16_.--This day the act chartering the "City of Nauvoo,"
the "Nauvoo Legion," and the "University of the City of Nauvoo," was
signed by the Governor, having previously passed the House and Senate.
Following is the act _in extenso_.

    An Act to Incorporate the City of Nauvoo.

    Section 1. Be it enacted by the people of the State of Illinois,
    represented in the General Assembly, that all that district of
    country embraced within the following boundaries, to wit: beginning
    at the north east corner of section thirty-one in Township seven,
    north of range eight, west of the fourth principal meridian, in the
    county of Hancock, and running thence west to the northwest corner
    of said section, thence north to the Mississippi river, thence west
    to the middle of the main channel of the said river; thence down
    the middle of said channel to a point due west of the southeast
    corner of fractional section number twelve in township six, north
    of range nine, west of the fourth principal meridian, thence east
    to the southeast corner of said section twelve, thence north on the
    range line between township six north, and range eight and nine
    west, to the southwest corner of section six in township six north
    of range eight west, thence east to the southeast corner of {240}
    said section, thence north to the place of beginning, including
    the town plats of Commerce and Nauvoo, shall hereafter be called
    and known by the name of the "City of Nauvoo," and the inhabitants
    thereof are hereby constituted a body corporate and politic by the
    name aforesaid, and shall have perpetual succession, and may have
    and use a common seal which they may change and alter at pleasure.

    Sec. 2. Whenever any tract of land adjoining the "City of Nauvoo"
    shall have been laid out into town lots, and duly recorded
    according to law, the same shall form a part of the "City of
    Nauvoo."

    Sec. 3. The inhabitants of said city, by the name and style
    aforesaid, shall have power to sue and be sued, to plead and be
    impleaded, defend and be defended, in all courts of law and equity,
    and all actions whatsoever; to purchase, receive and hold property,
    real and personal, in said city, to purchase, receive, and hold
    real property beyond the city, for burying grounds, or for other
    public purposes, for the use of the inhabitants of said city, to
    sell, lease, convey or dispose of property, real or personal, for
    the benefit of the city, to improve and protect such property, and
    to do all other things in relation thereto as natural persons.

    Sec. 4. There shall be a City Council, to consist of a Mayor, four
    Aldermen, and nine Councilors, who shall have the qualifications
    of electors of said city, and shall be chosen by the qualified
    voters thereof, and shall hold their offices for two years, and
    until their successors shall be elected and qualified. The City
    Council shall judge of the qualifications, elections and returns of
    their own members, and a majority of them shall form a quorum to
    do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and
    compel the attendance of absent members, under such penalties as
    may be prescribed by ordinance.

    Sec. 5. The Mayor, Aldermen and Councilors, before entering upon
    the duties of their office, shall take and subscribe an oath or
    affirmation that they will support the Constitution of the United
    States, and of this State and that they will well and truly
    perform the duties of their offices to the best of their skill and
    abilities.

    Sec. 6. On the first Monday of February next, and every two years
    thereafter, an election shall be held for the election of one
    Mayor, four Aldermen, and nine Councillors; and at the first
    election under the Act, three Judges shall be chosen _viva voce_
    by the electors present. The said Judges shall choose two Clerks,
    and the Judges and Clerks, before entering upon their duties,
    shall take and subscribe an oath or affirmation such as is now
    required by law to be taken by Judges or Clerks of other elections
    and at all subsequent elections, the necessary number of Judges
    and Clerks shall be appointed by the City Council. At the first
    election thus held, the polls shall be opened at 9 o'clock a. m.
    and closed at 6 o'clock p. m.; at the close of the polls the votes
    shall be counted {241} and a statement thereof proclaimed at the
    front door of the house at which said election shall be held; and
    the Clerks shall leave with each person elected, or at his place of
    residence, within five days after the election, a written notice
    of his election; and each person so notified shall within ten
    days after the election take the oath or affirmation hereinbefore
    mentioned, a certificate of which oath shall be deposited with the
    Recorder, whose appointment is hereafter provided for, and be by
    him preserved; and subsequent elections shall be held, conducted
    and returns thereof made as may be provided for by ordinance of the
    City Council.

    Sec. 7. All free white male inhabitants, who are of the age of
    twenty one years, who are entitled to vote for State Officers,
    and who shall have been actual residents of the city sixty days
    next preceding said election, shall be entitled to vote for City
    Officers.

    Sec. 8. The City Council shall have authority to levy and collect
    taxes, for city purposes, upon all property, real and personal,
    within the limits of the city, one-half per cent per annum, upon
    the assessed value thereof, and may enforce payment of the same
    in any manner, to be provided by ordinance, not repugnant to the
    Constitution of the United States or of this State.

    Sec. 9. The City Council shall have power to appoint a Recorder,
    Treasurer, Assessor, Marshal, Supervisor of streets, and all such
    other officers as may be necessary, and to prescribe their duties
    and remove them from office at pleasure.

    Sec. 10. The City Council shall have power to require, of all
    officers appointed in pursuance of this Act, bonds, with penalty
    and security, for the faithful performance of their respective
    duties, such as may be deemed expedient; and also to require all
    officers appointed as aforesaid, to take an oath for the faithful
    performance of the duties of their respective offices.

    Sec. 11. The City Council shall have power and authority to make,
    ordain, establish and execute all such ordinances, not repugnant
    to the Constitution of the United States or of this State, as they
    may deem necessary for the peace, benefit, good order, regulation,
    convenience, and cleanliness of said city: for the protection of
    property therein from destruction by fire, or otherwise, and for
    the health and happiness thereof: they shall have power to fill all
    vacancies that may happen by death, resignation, or removal, in
    any of the offices herein made elective; to fix and establish all
    the fees of the office of said corporation not herein established;
    to impose such fines, not exceeding one hundred dollars, for each
    offense, as they may deem just, for refusing to accept any office
    under the corporation, or for misconduct therein; to divide the
    city into wards; to add to the number of Aldermen and Councillors,
    {242} and apportion them among the several wards as may be most
    just and conducive to the interests of the city.

    Sec. 12. To license, tax, and regulate auctions, merchants,
    retailers, grocers, hawkers, peddlers, butchers, pawnbrokers, and
    money-changers.

    Sec. 13. The City Council shall have exclusive power within the
    city, by ordinance, to license, regulate, and restrain the keeping
    of ferries; to regulate the police of the city; to impose fines,
    forfeitures, and penalties for the breach of any ordinance, and
    provide for the recovery of such fines and forfeitures, and the
    enforcement of such penalties; and to pass such ordinances, as may
    be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the powers
    specified in this Act; provided such ordinances are not repugnant
    to the Constitution of the United States or of this State, and in
    fine to exercise such other legislative powers as are conferred on
    the City Council of the City of Springfield, by an Act entitled an
    Act to Incorporate the City of Springfield, approved February 3rd,
    1840.

    Sec. 14. All ordinances passed by the City Council shall, within
    one month after they shall have been passed, be published in some
    newspaper printed in the city, or certified copies thereof be
    posted up in three of the most public places in the city.

    Sec. 15. All ordinances of the city may be proven by the seal of
    the corporation, and when printed or published in book or pamphlet
    form purporting to be printed or published by authority of the
    corporation, the same shall be received in evidence in all courts
    or places without further proof.

    Sec. 16. The Mayor and Aldermen shall be conservators of the peace
    within the limits of said city, and shall have all the powers of
    Justices of the Peace therein, both in civil and criminal cases,
    arising under the laws of the State; they shall, as Justices of the
    Peace, within the limits of said city, perform the same duties, be
    governed by the same laws, give the same bonds and security, as
    other Justices of the Peace, and be commissioned as Justices of the
    Peace in and for said city by the Governor.

    Sec. 17. The Mayor shall have exclusive jurisdiction in all
    cases arising under the ordinances of the corporation, and shall
    issue such process as may be necessary to carry such ordinances
    into execution and effect; appeals may be had from any decision
    or judgment of said Mayor or Aldermen, arising under the city
    ordinances, to the Municipal Court, under such regulations as may
    be presented by ordinance; which court shall be composed of the
    Mayor as Chief Justice, and the Aldermen as Associate Justices,
    and from the final judgment of the Municipal Court to the Circuit
    Court of Hancock county, in the same manner of appeals {243} are
    taken from judgments of the Justices of the Peace; provided that
    the parties litigant shall have a right to a trial by a jury of
    twelve men in all cases before the Municipal Court. The Municipal
    Court shall have power to grant writs of habeas corpus in all cases
    arising under the ordinances of the City Council.

    Sec. 18. The Municipal Court shall sit on the first Monday of every
    month, and the City Council at such times and place as may be
    prescribed by city ordinance; special meetings of which may at any
    time be called by the Mayor or any two Aldermen.

    Sec. 19. All process issued by the Mayor, Aldermen, or Municipal
    Court, shall be directed to the Marshal, and, in the execution
    thereof, he shall be governed by the same laws as are or may be
    prescribed for the direction and compensation of constables in
    similar cases. The Marshal shall also perform such other duties as
    may be required of him under the ordinances of said city, and shall
    be the principal ministerial officer.

    Sec. 20. It shall be the duty of the Recorder to make and keep
    accurate records of all ordinances made by the City Council, and
    of all their proceedings in their corporate capacity, which record
    shall at all times be open to the inspection of the electors of
    said city, and shall perform such other duties as may be required
    of him by the ordinances of the City Council, and shall serve as
    Clerk of the Municipal Court.

    Sec. 21. When it shall be necessary to take private property for
    the opening, widening, or altering any public street, lane, avenue,
    or alley, the corporation shall make a just compensation therefor
    to the person whose property is to be taken, and if the amount of
    such compensation cannot be agreed upon, the Mayor shall cause the
    same to be ascertained by a jury of six disinterested freeholders
    of the city.

    Sec. 22. All jurors compelled to inquire into the amount of
    benefits or damages that shall happen to the owners of property
    so proposed to be taken, shall first be sworn to that effect, and
    shall return to the Mayor their inquest in writing, signed by each
    juror.

    Sec. 23. In case the Mayor shall at any time be guilty of a
    palpable omission of duty, or shall wilfully, and corruptly be
    guilty of oppression, mal conduct, or partiality, in the discharge
    of the duties of his office, he shall be liable to be indicted in
    the Circuit Court of Hancock county, and on conviction he shall be
    fined not more than two hundred dollars, and the Court shall have
    power on the recommendation of the jury to add to the judgment of
    the Court that he be removed from office.

    Sec. 24. The City Council may establish and organize an institution
    of learning within the limits of the city, for the teaching of
    the Arts, Sciences, and Learned Professions, to be called the
    "University of the City of Nauvoo," which institution shall be
    under the control and {244} management of a Board of Trustees,
    consisting of a Chancellor, Registrar, and twenty-three Regents,
    which Board shall thereafter be a body corporate and politic, with
    perpetual succession by the name of the "Chancellor and Regents of
    the University of the City of Nauvoo," and shall have full power to
    pass, ordain, establish, and execute, all such laws and ordinances
    as they may consider necessary for the welfare and prosperity of
    said University, its officers and students; provided that the said
    laws and ordinances shall not be repugnant to the Constitution of
    the United States, or of this State; and provided also, that the
    Trustees shall at all times be appointed by the City Council, and
    shall have all the powers and privileges for the advancement of the
    cause of education which appertain to the Trustees of any other
    College or University of this State.

    Sec. 25. The City Council may organize the inhabitants of said
    city, subject to military duty, into a body of independent military
    men, to be called the "Nauvoo Legion," the Court Martial of which
    shall be composed of the commissioned officers of said Legion,
    and constitute the law-making department, with full power and
    authority to make, ordain, establish, and execute all such laws
    and ordinances as may be considered necessary for the benefit,
    government, and regulation of said Legion; provided said Court
    Martial shall pass no law or act, repugnant to, or inconsistent
    with, the Constitution of the United States, or of this State; and
    provided also that the officers of the Legion shall be commissioned
    by the Governor of the State. The said Legion shall perform the
    same amount of military duty as is now or may be hereafter required
    of the regular militia of the State, and shall be at the disposal
    of the Mayor in executing the laws and ordinances of the city
    corporation, and the laws of the State, and at the disposal of the
    Governor for the public defense, and the execution of the laws of
    the State or of the United States, and shall be entitled to their
    proportion of the public arms; and provided also, that said Legion
    shall be exempt from all other military duty.

    Sec. 26. The inhabitants of the city of Nauvoo are hereby exempted
    from working on any road beyond the limits of the city, and for
    the purpose of keeping the streets, lanes, avenues, and alleys in
    repair, to require of the male inhabitants of said city, over the
    age of twenty-one, and under fifty years, to labor on said streets,
    lanes, avenues, and alleys, not exceeding three days in each year;
    any person failing to perform such labor, when duly notified by the
    Supervisor, shall forfeit and pay the sum of one dollar per day for
    each day so neglected or refused.

    Sec. 27. The City Council shall have power to provide for the
    punishment of offenders by imprisonment in the county or city jail,
    in all cases when such offenders shall fail or refuse to pay the
    fines and forfeitures, which may be recovered against them.

    {245} Sec. 28. This Act is hereby declared to be a public Act, and
    shall take effect on the first Monday of February next.

    Wm. L. D. Ewing,

    Speaker of the House of Representatives.

    S. H. Anderson,

    Speaker of the Senate.

    Approved Dec. 16, 1840.

    Thos. Carlin.

    State of Illinois, Office of Secretary of State.

    I, Stephen A. Douglas, Secretary of State, do hereby certify that
    the foregoing is a true and perfect copy of the enrolled law now on
    file in my office.

    Witness my hand, and Seal of State, at Springfield, this 18th day
    of December, 1840.

    [L. S.]

    S. A. Douglas.

    Secretary of State.

The following are the Legislative powers alluded to in the 13th section
of the foregoing Act, as pertaining to the City Council of the City of
Springfield, and which consequently became a part of the Charter of the
City of Nauvoo, to wit:

    _Of the Legislative Powers of the City Council_.

    Sec. 1. The City Council shall have powers and authority to levy
    and collect taxes upon all property, real and personal, within
    the city, not exceeding one-half per cent., per annum, upon the
    assessed valuation thereof, and may enforce the payment of the
    same in any manner prescribed by ordinance, not repugnant to the
    Constitution of the United States and of this State.

    Sec. 2. The City Council shall have power to require of all
    officers appointed in pursuance of the Charters, bonds with penalty
    and security for the faithful performance of their respective
    duties as may be deemed expedient, and also to require all
    officers appointed as aforesaid, to take an oath for the faithful
    performance of the duties of their respective offices upon entering
    upon the discharge of the same.

    Sec. 3. To establish, support, and regulate common schools, to
    borrow money on the credit of the city; provided, that no sum or
    sums of money shall be borrowed at a greater interest than six per
    cent per annum, nor shall the interest on the aggregate of all the
    sums borrowed and outstanding ever exceed one half of the city
    revenue, arising for taxes assessed on real property within the
    corporation.

    {246} Sec. 4. To make regulations to prevent the introduction of
    contagious diseases into the city, to make Quarantine Laws for that
    purpose, and enforce the same.

    Sec. 5. To appropriate and provide for the payment of the debt and
    expenses of the city.

    Sec. 6. To establish hospitals, and make regulations for the
    government of the same.

    Sec. 7. To make regulations to secure the general health of the
    inhabitants, to declare what shall be a nuisance, and to prevent
    and remove the same.

    Sec. 8. To provide the city with water, to dig wells and erect
    pumps in the streets for the extinguishment of fires, and
    convenience of the inhabitants.

    Sec. 9. To open, alter, widen, extend, establish, grade, pave, or
    otherwise improve and keep in repair streets, avenues, lanes, and
    alleys.

    Sec. 10. To establish, erect, and keep in repair bridges.

    Sec. 11. To divide the city into wards, and specify the boundaries
    thereof, and create additional wards, as the occasion may require.

    Sec. 12. To provide for lighting the streets and erecting lamp
    posts.

    Sec. 13. To establish, support, and regulate night watches.

    Sec. 14. To erect market houses, establish markets, and market
    places, and provide for the government and regulation thereof.

    Sec. 15. To provide for erecting all needful buildings for the use
    of the city.

    Sec. 16. To provide for enclosing, improving, and regulating all
    public grounds belonging to the city.

    Sec. 17. To license, tax, and regulate auctioneers, merchants, and
    retailers, grocers, taverns ordinaries, hawkers, peddlers, brokers,
    pawnbrokers, and money changers.

    Sec. 18. To license, tax, and regulate hackney carriages, wagons,
    carts and drays, and fix the rates to be charged for the carriage
    of persons, and for the wagonage, cartage and drayage of property.

    Sec. 19. To license and regulate porters and fix the rates of
    porterage.

    Sec. 20. To license and regulate theatrical and other exhibitions,
    shows and amusements.

    Sec. 21. To tax, restrain, prohibit, and suppress, tippling houses,
    dram shops, gaming houses, bawdy and other disorderly houses.

    Sec. 22. To provide for the prevention and extinguishment of fires,
    and to organize and establish fire companies.

    Sec. 23. To regulate the fixing of chimneys, and the flues thereof,
    and stove pipes.

    {247} Sec. 24. To regulate the storage of gunpowder, tar, pitch,
    rosin, and other combustible materials.

    Sec. 25. To regulate and order parapet walls, and partition fences.

    Sec. 26. To establish standard weights and measures, and regulate
    the weights and measures to be used in the city in all other cases
    not provided for by law.

    Sec. 27. To provide for the inspection and measuring of lumber and
    other building materials, and for the measurement of all kinds of
    mechanical work.

    Sec. 28. To provide for the inspection and weighing of hay, lime,
    and stone coal, the measuring of charcoal, firewood, and other
    fuel, to be sold or used within the city.

    Sec. 29. To provide for and regulate the inspection of tobacco, and
    of beef, pork, flour, meal, and whiskey in barrels.

    Sec. 30. To regulate the weight, quality, and price of bread, sold,
    and used in the city.

    Sec. 31. To provide for taking the enumeration of the inhabitants
    of the city.

    Sec. 32. To regulate the election of city officers, and provide
    for removing from office any person holding an office created by
    ordinance.

    Sec. 33. To fix the compensation of all city officers, and regulate
    the fees of jurors, witnesses, and others, for services rendered
    under this Act or any ordinance.

    Sec. 34. To regulate the police of the city, to impose fines,
    and forfeitures, and penalties, for the breach of any ordinance,
    and provide for the recovery and appropriation of such fines and
    forfeitures, and the enforcement of such penalties.

    Sec. 35. The City Council shall have exclusive power within
    the city by ordinance, to license, regulate, and suppress, and
    restrain, billiard tables, and from one to twenty pin alleys, and
    every other description of gaming or gambling.

    Sec. 36. The City Council shall have power to make all ordinances
    which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution
    the powers specified in this Act, so that such ordinances be not
    repugnant to nor inconsistent with, the constitution of the United
    States or of this state.

    Sec. 37. The style of the ordinances of the city shall be--"Be it
    ordained by the city council of the city of Springfield--[Nauvoo]."

    Sec. 38. All ordinances passed by the city council shall, within
    one month after they shall have been passed, be published in some
    newspaper published in the city, and shall not be in force until
    they shall have been published as aforesaid.

    Sec. 39. All ordinances of the city may be proven by the seal of
    the {248} corporation, and when printed and published by authority
    of the corporation, the same shall be received in evidence in all
    courts and places without further proof.

John C. Bennett who had been delegated to Springfield to carry our
petition for a City Charter, announced the passage of the bill, as
follows--

    _Letter of John C. Bennett to the "Times and Seasons"--Announcing
    the passage of the act incorporating Nauvoo_.

    City Of Springfield, December 16, 1840.

    _Editors of the Times and Seasons_:

    The act incorporating the city of Nauvoo has just passed the
    council of revision, and is now a law of the land, to take effect
    and be in force from and after the first Monday in February
    next. The aforesaid act contains two additional charters--one
    incorporating the "Nauvoo Legion," the other the "University of the
    city of Nauvoo."

    All these charters are very broad and liberal, conferring the most
    plenary powers on the corporators. Illinois has acquitted herself
    with honor, and her state legislators shall never be forgotten.
    Every power we asked has been granted, every request gratified,
    every desire fulfilled. In the senate Mr. Little cancelled every
    obligation to our people, and faithfully, and honestly, and with
    untiring diligence, discharged every obligation devolving upon him
    as our immediate representative in the Upper House. Mark well that
    man, and do him honor. Snyder, and Ralston, and Moore, and Ross,
    and Stapp, and numerous others, likewise in that branch of our
    state government, rendered as very essential services; and the act
    passed that body without a dissenting voice.

    In the House of Representatives, Charles, our immediate
    Representative in the Lower House, was at his post and discharged
    his duty as a faithful representative; he is an acting, and not
    a talking man, and has fulfilled all his obligations to us. Many
    members in this house, likewise, were warmly in our favor; and with
    only one or two dissenting voices, every representative appeared
    inclined to extend to us all such powers as they considered us
    justly entitled to, and voted for the law; and here I should not
    forget to mention, that Lincoln, [2] whose name we erased from the
    electoral ticket in November (not however on account of any dislike
    to him as a man, but simply because his was the last name on the
    ticket, and we desired to show our friendship to the Democratic
    {249} party by substituting the name of Ralston for some one of the
    Whigs) had the magnanimity to vote for our act, and came forward,
    after the final vote to the bar of the house, and cordially
    congratulated me on its passage.

    Our worthy governor is certainly disposed to do us ample justice in
    every respect, and to extend to us every facility for our future
    happiness and prosperity.

    Illinois has certainly done her duty, and her whole duty; and now
    it becomes us to show ourselves upright, honest, just, worthy of
    the favors bestowed by noble, generous, and magnanimous statesmen,
    I have said that we are a law-abiding people, and we must now show
    it. The state has washed her hands in granting all our petitions,
    and if we do not now show ourselves approved, the curse must fall
    upon our own heads. Justice, equal justice, should be our fixed
    object and purpose, and the Great God will prosper us; length of
    days will be in our right hand, and in our left, glory and honor.

    Yours, &c.,

    John C. Bennett.

The City Charter of Nauvoo is of my own plan and device. I concocted it
for the salvation of the Church, and on principles so broad, that every
honest man might dwell secure under its protective influence without
distinction of sect or party.

Footnotes:

1. Elder Taylor was also opposed by Rev. Thomas Hamilton, whom he
met in a public debate and easily vanquished. "No great honor,
however," says Elder Taylor in his account of the affair, "as he was
a very ignorant man." Elder Taylor secured for his meeting place the
Wellington rooms, and from the platform he answered all who opposed
him, and succeeded, despite all opposition, in organizing a branch of
the Church in Douglas.

2. This doubtless refers to Abraham Lincoln who was then a member of
the legislature. See Nicolay and Hay's _Abraham Lincoln_, Vol. I, p. 42
_et seq_.

{250}



CHAPTER XIV.

Vale 1840--Enter 1841--List of Publications for and against
the Church--Whereabouts of the Twelve Apostles--"Election and
Reprobation"--Proclamation to the Saints.

[Sidenote: The acquittal of R.D. Foster.]

_Sunday, December 20, 1840_.--I was called upon by the High Council
to decide the adjourned case of Robert D. Foster. Having heard the
witnesses, I decided that he be acquitted of the charges against him,
which decision the Council approved. [1]

[Sidenote: An Objector Put Down.]

This is a fair specimen of the wisdom of the nineteenth century that
opposes itself to the work of the Most High God.

    "Your preacher preaches false doctrine," exclaimed a sectarian in
    Manchester to one of the Saints. "Ah!" inquired the other, "wherein
    does he teach false doctrine?" "Why, in telling the people to
    go to America, to be sure," said the sectarian; "and" continued
    he, "there is nothing in the Bible that commands people to go to
    America." "Ah!" replied the other, "and there is nothing in the
    Bible that commands people to stop in Manchester; so I wonder
    how you dare stay in so unscriptural a place another night; for
    certainly no one ought to live in England unless they can find
    scripture for it, any more than in America."

_Monday, 21_.--The petition of Elias Higbee, and Robert B. Thompson,
under date of 28th November, 1840, was presented to the House of
Representatives of the United {251} States, referred to the Committee
on the Judiciary, and ordered to be printed.

_Friday, 25_.--Elders Brigham Young and George A. Smith attended a
conference at Hanley, Staffordshire Potteries, at which was represented
an increase of six Elders, twenty-six Priests, ten Teachers, nine
deacons, and three hundred and fifty-six members, since last July
Conference; and also ordained six Elders, six Priests, four Teachers,
and three Deacons.

_Sunday, 27_.--Elders Kimball and Woodruff occupied a chapel belonging
to the Independents in London. Elder Woodruff preached.

_Monday, 28_.--There are ninety-five Saints in Edinburgh, Scotland,
raised up by Elder Orson Pratt. Elder George D. Watt is now laboring in
that place.

_Wednesday, 30_.--Elder Brigham Young writes from Liverpool:

    _Brigham Young's Letter to the Prophet Reporting Labors in England_.

    Beloved Brother:--I write to inform you of a few particulars of my
    journey to London. I left Manchester November 25th, in company with
    Elder Kimball; we visited the following places, viz., Macclesfield,
    Burslem, Hanley, Lane End, West Bromwich, and Birmingham. We
    traveled by coach and railway, and arrived in London on Monday
    30th: found Elder Woodruff in good health. He had baptized three or
    four persons the day before we arrived. I stayed in London till the
    11th December, when I left for Herefordshire. Brothers Woodruff and
    Williams came with me to the railway station. Elder Kimball stayed
    in London.

    The prospect for the spread of the Gospel brightened up while we
    were there. Our feelings were very clear and decisive that Elder
    Kimball had better stay with Elder Woodruff. I was much interested
    while there with my brethren. I pray the Lord to roll on His work
    in that great city. I feel much for the people in that place! yea
    my feelings are exquisite, for why, God knows; but I believe it
    is for the glory of God, and the good of souls. May His name be
    glorified.

    I arrived in Cheltenham the same day I left London--only
    about seven and a half hours going one hundred and one miles,
    thirty-eight of it by coach. I stayed over the Sabbath there;
    preached twice to a very attentive congregation. In the afternoon
    the house was full to {252} overflowing. Elder Henry Glover is
    preaching in this place, and in the region around with much
    success. I think he is a humble, good man, and will do much good.
    I attended the Gadfield Elm conference. The minutes of the Garway
    conference were read, which had been held on the 8th. After this I
    visited the brethren till the Stanley Hill conference, which was
    held on the 21st. The church in Garway numbers ninety-five members,
    one Elder, seven Priests, three Teachers and one Deacon. At
    Gadfield Elm conference there were seventeen branches represented,
    three hundred and twenty-seven members, thirteen Elders,
    thirty-one Priests, nine Teachers. The Stanley Hill conference
    contains twenty-five branches, which represented eight hundred and
    thirty-nine members, seventeen Elders, fifty-seven Priests, sixteen
    Teachers and one Deacon. Including officers there are in these
    three conferences twelve hundred and sixty-one members, thirty-one
    Elders, ninety-five Priests, twenty-eight Teachers and two
    Deacons; making two hundred and fifty-five added since the October
    conference.

    I attended the conference in the Staffordshire Potteries on the
    25th; we had a good meeting; but I have not the minutes before me,
    so I cannot give a particular statement of the church there, yet I
    can say they are prospering.

    In my travels and at the conferences, there were some baptized and
    many ordained. We can say truly, that the Lord is doing a great
    work in the land. The Gospel is preached to the poor, and signs
    follow them that believe. I arrived in Liverpool last evening and
    expect to tarry here till the Book of Mormon is completed.

    I am as ever, your brother in the Kingdom of Patience,

    Brigham Young.

About this time, immense quantities of rain fell which produced a flood
in the east and south of France, doing immense damage, carrying with
it buildings, bridges and everything in its way. Earthquakes have been
felt in divers places the past year; and fearful sights and bloody
signs have been witnessed in the heavens, fulfilling the words of the
ancient Prophets concerning the last days.

I copy the following from a printed sheet:

    Signs in the Sky.

    A most wonderful phenomenon was observed last week by the
    inhabitants of Hull and the neighborhood. A perfectly blood red
    flag was seen flying in the heavens, which illuminated the horizon
    for many miles around. At intervals it changed its form, assuming
    that of a {253} cross, sword and many other shapes. At one o'clock
    on Friday morning, the town was nearly as light as noon-day; the
    inhabitant were parading the streets; fear and dismay pictured in
    their countenances. This wonder continued until near three o'clock,
    when it gradually went to the westward, illuminating the Humber as
    it seemed to sink in her waters. Then for a few seconds all became
    total darkness, when from the northwest by north, arose the most
    beautiful light, which shot away towards the western hemisphere,
    leaving in its train the most beautiful and varigated colors, and
    which the eye might readily form into armies drawn up in the order
    of battle, charging and retreating alternately, and then again all
    was wrapped in the sable curtain of night. It appears that many
    signs were seen on the same night in different parts of the kingdom.

[Sidenote: List of Books.]

The following is a list of books, pamphlets, and letters published for
and against the Latter-day Saints during the past year, so far as such
have come under my observation:

Fourteen numbers of the _Times and Seasons_ have been issued from the
office in Nauvoo, containing two hundred and twenty-four pages, edited
by Ebenezer Robinson and Don Carlos Smith, three numbers having been
issued during 1839.

Eight numbers of the _Millennial Star_ have been published at 149
Oldham Road, Manchester, England, containing two hundred and sixteen
pages, edited by Elder Parley P. Pratt.

A selection of hymns was published about the first of July, in England,
by Brigham Young, John Taylor, and Parley P. Pratt, for the use of the
Saints in Europe.

The Rev. Robert Hays, Wesleyan minister, Douglas, Isle of Man,
published three addresses in pamphlet form, against the Latter-day
Saints, which were replied to in the following order:

"An Answer to Some False Statements and Misrepresentations," published
by the Rev. Robert Hays, Wesleyan minister, in an address to his
society in Douglas, and its vicinity on the subject of Mormonism, by
John Taylor, October 7th, 1840.

{254} "Calumny Refuted, and the Truth Defended," being a reply to
the second address of the Rev. Robert Hays, by John Taylor, Douglas,
October 29, 1840.

"Truth Defended and Methodism Weighed in the Balances and Found
Wanting," being a reply to the third address of the Rev. Robert Hays
against the Latter-day Saints and also an "Exposure of the Principles
of Methodism," by John Taylor, Liverpool, December 7, 1840.

"The Latter-day Saints and the Book of Mormon;" being a few words of
warning against the Latter-day Saints, from a minister to his flock. W.
J. Morrish, Ledbury, Herefordshire, September.

A second warning by the same W. J. Morrish, October 15th.

"A Few More Facts Relating to the Self-styled "Latter-day Saints,"
by John Simmons, Church of England minister, Dymock, Herefordshire,
September 14th."

Several letters written by Mr. Curran, and published in the _Manx
Liberal_, Isle of Man, in October, were replied to by John Taylor.

"Mormonism Weighed in the Balances of the Sanctuary and Found Wanting;"
the substance of four lectures by Samuel Haining, published in Douglas,
Isle of Man; a tract of sixty-six pages.

Interesting account of several remarkable visions, and of the late
discovery of ancient American Records giving an account of the
commencement of the work of the Lord in this generation, by Elder Orson
Pratt, Edinburgh, September.

The Word of the Lord to the Citizens of London, of every sect and
denomination; and to every individual into whose hands it may fall;
showing forth the plan of salvation as laid down in the New Testament;
namely, faith in our Lord Jesus Christ--Repentance--Baptism for the
remission of sins--and the Gift of the Holy Ghost, by the laying on of
hands, presented by Heber C. Kimball {255} and Wilford Woodruff, Elders
of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

An exposure of the errors and fallacies of the self-named "Latter-day
Saints." By William Hewitt, of Lane End, Staffordshire, Potteries.

An answer to Mr. William Hewitt's tract against the Latter-day Saints.
By Elder Parley P. Pratt.

Plain Facts; showing the falsehood and folly of the Rev. C. Bush (the
Church of England minister, of the parish of Peover, Cheshire); being a
reply to his tract against the Latter-day Saints by Parley P. Pratt.

A few remarks by way of reply to an anonymous scribbler, calling
himself "a Philanthropist," disabusing the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints, of the slanders and falsehoods which he has
attempted to fasten upon it. By Samuel Bennett, Philadelphia.

Mormonism unmasked, and Mr. Bennett's reply answered and refuted. By a
Philanthropist of Chester county. Published in Philadelphia.

An Appeal to the American People; being an account of the persecutions
of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and the barbarities
inflicted on them by the inhabitants of the State of Missouri, sixty
closely printed pages second edition revised by authority of said
Church, Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith, Presidency.

A Reply to Mr. Thomas Taylor's Pamphlet, entitled "Complete Failure,"
etc., and also to Mr. Richard Livesey's tract, "Mormonism Exposed" by
Parley P. Pratt.

The editor of the _London Dispatch_, published an article on November
8th, against the Latter-day Saints, containing some of the false
statements of Captain D. L. St. Clair, in his tract against them, which
was replied to by Elder Parley P. Pratt, in the November number of the
_Millennial Star_.

"The Millennium, and other Poems:" to which is annexed, "A Treatise on
the Regeneration and Eternal {256} Duration of Matter," by Parley P.
Pratt, New York.

_January 1, 1841_.--Elders Brigham Young, Parley P. Pratt, and John
Taylor attended a conference in Liverpool.

Elders Heber C. Kimball, and Wilford Woodruff are in London.

Elder Orson Pratt in Edinburgh.

Elder George A. Smith in Burslem.

Elder Willard Richards in Preston.

Elders Orson Hyde and J. E. Page are _en route_ for Jerusalem.

Elder William Smith, at Plymouth, Hancock county, Illinois.

The _Millennial Star_ [No. 9, Vol. I] contains the following
communication, which I have read several times. It is one of the
sweetest pieces that has been written in these last days. I therefore
insert it entire.

    _Election and Reprobation--by Brigham Young and Willard Richards_.

    Do you believe in election and reprobation? To prevent the
    necessity of repeating a thousand times what may be said at once,
    we purpose to answer this oft-asked question in writing, so that
    the Saints may learn doctrine, and all who will may understand
    that such election and reprobation as is taught in the Old and New
    Testaments, and other revelations from God, we fully believe, in
    connection with every other principle of righteousness; and we ask
    this favor of all into whose hands our answer may come, that they
    will not condemn until they have read it through, in the spirit of
    meekness and prayer.

    The Lord (Jehovah) hath spoken through Isaiah (xiii:1), saying,
    "Behold my servant whom I uphold--mine elect in whom my soul
    delighteth;" evidently referring to the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son
    of God, chosen, or elected by the Father. (I Peter i:20). "Who
    verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was
    manifest in these last times for you, who by Him do believe in God
    to serve Him in the redemption of the world, to be a covenant of
    the people (Isaiah xlii:6), for a light to the Gentiles, and the
    glory of His people Israel, having ordained Him to be the judge
    of the quick until dead (Acts x:42), that through Him forgiveness
    of sins might be preached (Acts xiii:38), unto all who would be
    obedient unto His Gospel." (Mark xvi:16, 17).

    {257} Every High Priest must be ordained (Heb. v:1), and if Christ
    had not received ordination, He would not have had power to ordain
    others, as he did when He ordained the Twelve (Mark iii:14), to
    take part in the ministry which He had received of His Father;
    also, (John xv:16): "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you,
    and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit; (Heb.
    v:4), for no man taketh this honor unto himself, but he that is
    called of God, as was Aaron (v:5), so also Christ glorified not
    Himself to be made an High Priest; but He that said unto Him,
    Thou art my Son, today have I begotten Thee." No being can give
    that which he does not possess; consequently, no man can confer
    the Priesthood on another, if he has not himself first received
    it; and the Priesthood is of such a nature that it is impossible
    to investigate the principles of election, reprobation, &c.,
    without touching upon the Priesthood also; and although some may
    say that Christ, as God, needed no ordination, having possessed
    it eternally, yet Christ says, (Matt. xxviii:18), "All power is
    _given_ unto me in heaven and in earth;" which could not have been
    if He was in eternal possession; and in the previously quoted
    verse we discover that He that said unto Him [_i. e_. His Father]
    glorified Him to be made an High Priest, or ordained Him to the
    work of creating the world and all things upon it, (Col. i:16),
    "For by Him were all things created that are in heaven, and that
    are in earth," &c., and of redeeming the same from the fall, and to
    the judging of the quick and dead, for the right of judging rests
    in the Priesthood, and it is through this medium that the Father
    hath committed all judgment unto the Son (John v:22), referring to
    His administration on earth. It was necessary that Christ should
    receive the Priesthood to qualify Him to minister before His
    Father, unto the children of men, so as to redeem and save them.
    Does it seem reasonable that any man should take it upon him to do
    a part of the same work, or to assist in the same Priesthood, who
    has not been called by the spirit of prophecy or revelation as was
    Aaron, and ordained accordingly? And can it be expected that a man
    will be called by revelation who does not believe in revelation?
    Or will any man submit to ordination for the fulfillment of a
    revelation or call, in which he hath no faith? We think not.

    That we may learn still further that God calls or elects particular
    men to perform particular works, or on whom to confer special
    blessings, we read, (Isaiah xlv:4), "For Jacob my servant's sake,
    and Israel mine elect, I have even called thee [Cyrus] by thy
    name," to be a deliverer to my people Israel, and help to plant
    them on my holy mountain, (Isaiah lxv:9, see connection) "for mine
    elect shall inherit it, and my servants shall dwell there," even
    on the mountains of Palestine, the {258} land of Canaan which God
    had before promised to Abraham and his seed; (Gen. xvii:8), and
    the particular reason why Abraham was chosen or elected to be the
    father of this blessed nation, is clearly told by the Lord, (Gen.
    xviii:19), "For I know him, that he will command his children and
    his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord,
    to do justice and judgment; that the Lord may bring upon Abraham
    that which he hath spoken of him;" and this includes the general
    principle of election, _i. e_. that God chose, elected, or ordained
    Jesus Christ, His Son, to be the creator, governor, savior, and
    judge of the world; and Abraham to be the father of the faithful,
    on account of His foreknowledge of their obedience to His will and
    commandments, which agrees with the saying in II Tim. ii:21, "If a
    man therefore purge himself from these [i. e. iniquities], he shall
    be a vessel unto honor, sanctified, and meet for the master's use,
    and prepared unto every good work."

    Thus it appears that God has chosen or elected certain individuals
    to certain blessings, or to the performance of certain works; and
    that we may more fully understand the movements of the Supreme
    Governor of the universe, in the order of election, we proceed to
    quote the sacred writers, (Rom. viii:29, 30), "For whom He did
    foreknow, He also did predestinate to be conformed to the image
    of His Son, that He might be the firstborn among many brethren.
    Moreover, whom He did predestinate, them He also called: and whom
    He called, them He also justified: and whom He justified, them He
    also glorified." And whom did He foreknow? Those that loved Him,
    as we find in the 28th verse of the same chapter--"And we know
    that all things work together for good to them that love God, to
    them who are the called according to His purpose." And "who are
    the called according to His purpose?" Those whom He foreknew, for
    He foreknew that those who loved Him would do His will and work
    righteousness; and it is vain for men to say they love God, if they
    do not keep His commandments. Cain found it so when he presented
    an unrighteous offering, for God said unto him, (Gen. iv:7), "If
    thou dost well, shalt thou not be accepted?" And yet he was not
    accepted. "But whoso keepeth his word, in him verily is the love
    of God perfected; and hereby know we that we are in Him," (I John
    ii:5), or, that we "are the called according to his purpose."

    The principles of God's kingdom are perfect and harmonious, and
    the Scriptures of truth must also agree in all their parts, so
    that one sentiment thereof shall not destroy another, and when we
    read that, "whom He did foreknow, He also did predestinate;" and
    that "known unto God are all His works;" so that it might appear
    from an abstract {259} view thereof, that God foreknew all, and
    consequently predestinated all "to be conformed to the image of
    His Son;" we ought also to read, (Mark xvi:16), "He that believeth
    not shall be damned;" and (John viii:14), "If ye believe not that
    I am he, ye shall die in your sins;" also (Matt. xxv:41), "Depart
    from me, ye cursed, * * * for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no
    meat," &c.

    Paul, referring to the Saints, (Rom. 1:7), calls them beloved
    of God, called to be Saints; and says, (Rom. viii:1), "There is
    no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
    after the flesh, but after the Spirit," and goes on to show in his
    epistle to the Romans, that the law (the law of carnal commandments
    given to the children of Israel, the covenant people), could not
    make the comers thereunto perfect (see also Heb. x:1), but was
    given for a schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ (Gal. iii:24);
    so that when He had come and offered Himself without spot unto
    God (Heb. ix:14), the sacrifice of the law should be done away
    in him, that the honest in heart all might come unto the perfect
    law of liberty (James i:25); or the Gospel of Christ, walking
    no longer after the flesh but after the spirit, and be of that
    number who love God and keep His commandments, that they might be
    called according to His purpose (Rom. viii:28); and these were the
    individuals referred to, whom God foreknew; such as Abel, Seth,
    Enoch, Noah, Melchisedek, Abraham, Lot, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph,
    Moses, Caleb, Joshua, the harlot Rahab, who wrought righteousness
    by hiding the servants of God, when their lives were sought by
    their enemies, Gideon, Barak, Sampson, Jeptha, David, Samuel, and
    the Prophets; (Heb. xi), "Who through faith, subdued kingdoms,
    wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of
    lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the
    sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight,
    and turned to flight the armies of the aliens." These all died
    in faith, having kept the commandments of the Most High, having
    obtained the promise of a glorious inheritance, and are waiting the
    fulfillment of the promise which they obtained; (Heb. xi:40), "God
    having provided some better things for us, that they without us
    should not be made perfect."

    The Prophet Alma bears a similar testimony to the other Prophets
    concerning election, in his 9th chapter [Book of Mormon] saying,
    "This is the manner after which they were ordained: being called
    and prepared from the foundation of the world, according to the
    foreknowledge of God, on account of their exceeding faith and
    good works; in the first place being left to choose good or evil;
    therefore they have chosen good, and exercising exceeding great
    faith, are called with a holy calling, yea, with that holy calling
    which was prepared with, and according to, a {260} preparatory
    redemption for such; and thus they have been called to this holy
    calling on account of their faith, while others would reject the
    Spirit of God on account of the hardness of their hearts and
    blindness of their minds, while, if it had not been for this,
    they might have had as great privilege as their brethren. Or in
    fine, in the first place, they were on the same standing with
    their brethren; thus, this holy calling being prepared from the
    foundation of the world for such as would not harden their hearts,
    being in and through the atonement of the only begotten Son, who
    was prepared; and thus being called by this holy calling, and
    ordained unto the high priesthood of the holy order of God, to
    teach His commandments unto the children of men, that they also
    might enter into His rest: this high priesthood being after the
    order of His Son, which order was from the foundation of the
    world: or, in other words, being without beginning of days or end
    of years, being prepared from eternity to all eternity, according
    to his foreknowledge of all things." (Rom. ix:11, 12), "For the
    children being not yet born, neither having done any good or
    evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand,
    not of works, but of Him that calleth; it was said unto her, The
    elder shall serve the younger." As we have before shown why God
    chose Abraham to be the father of the faithful, viz., because He
    knew Abraham would command his children and his household after
    him; so now we see, by this, why the purposes of God, according
    to election, should stand, and that for His oath's sake." (Gen.
    xxii:16, 17, 18), "By myself have I sworn, saith the Lord, for
    because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy
    son, thine only son, that in blessing I will bless thee, and in
    multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and as
    the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess
    the gate of his enemies, and in thy seed shall all the nations of
    the earth be blessed because thou hast obeyed my voice." Here the
    Lord Jesus, coming through the seed of Abraham, is again referred
    to, through whose sufferings and death, or in whom all the nations
    of the earth were to be blessed, or made alive, as they had died in
    Adam. (1 Cor. xv:22). In this, election is made manifest, for God
    elected or chose the children of Israel to be His peculiar people,
    and to them belong the covenants and promises, and the blessings
    received by the Gentiles come through the covenants to Abraham and
    his seed; for through the unbelief of the Jews (Rom. xi: 17) they
    were broken off, and the Gentiles were grafted in; but they stand
    by faith (Rom. xi: 20), and not by the oath of election; therefore
    it becometh them to fear lest they cease quickly to bear fruit and
    be broken off (verse 21) that the Jews may be grafted in again; for
    they shall be grafted in again (verse 23), if they abide not in
    unbelief.

    {261} The Gentiles became partakers of the blessings of election
    and promises, through faith and obedience, as Peter says, writing
    to the strangers scattered abroad (1 Peter, 1st chap.), who were
    the Gentiles, the "elect according to the foreknowledge of God the
    Father, through sanctification of the spirit unto obedience;" (1
    Peter, ii: 9) for "ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood,
    an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should show forth
    the praises of Him who hath called you out of darkness into His
    marvelous light, (verse 10) which in time past were not a people,
    but now are the people of God: which had not obtained mercy, but
    now have obtained mercy."

    Why were they a peculiar people? Because God had chosen that
    generation of Gentiles, and conferred on them the blessings which
    descended through the Priesthood, and the covenants unto the house
    of Israel, or grafted them into the good olive tree (Rom. xi: 17);
    and thus the house of Israel became the ministers of salvation to
    the Gentiles; and this is what the house of Israel was elected
    unto, not only their own salvation, but through them salvation unto
    all others; (John iv: 22) "For salvation is of the Jews," (Rom. xi:
    11) and "through their fall salvation is come unto the Gentiles."

    Among the promised seed we find Jesus Christ neither last nor
    least, but the Great High Priest and head of all, who was chosen
    to lay down His life for the redemption of the world, for without
    the shedding of blood there could be no remission of sins (Heb.
    ix: 22). (Deut. vii: 6, 7, 8, 9,) Moses bears a similar testimony
    with Peter and Paul to the principles of election--"For thou art
    an holy people unto the Lord thy God: the Lord thy God hath chosen
    thee to be a special people unto Himself, above all people that are
    upon the face of the earth. The Lord did not set His love upon you,
    nor choose you, because ye were more in number than any people;
    for ye were the fewest of all people: but because the Lord loved
    you, and because He would keep the oath which He had sworn unto
    your fathers, hath the Lord brought you out with a mighty hand, and
    redeemed you out of the house of bondmen, from the hand of Pharaoh,
    king of Egypt. Know therefore that the Lord thy God, He is God, the
    faithful God, which keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love
    Him and keep his commandments to a thousand generations;" which
    proves the long continuance of the blessings of this highly favored
    people.

    And the Lord said unto her, (Rebecca, Gen. xxv: 23) "The elder
    shall serve the younger." And why? Because that Isaac, the
    father of Esau and Jacob, the husband of Rebecca, and the son of
    promise to Abraham, was the heir; and as Esau was the elder son
    of his father Isaac, he had a legal claim to the heirship; but
    through unbelief, {262} hardness of heart, and hunger, he sold
    his birthright to his younger brother Jacob (Gen. xxv: 33); and
    God knowing beforehand that he would do this of his own free will
    and choice, or acting upon that agency which God has delegated to
    all men, said to his mother, "The elder shall serve the younger;"
    for as the elder son Esau, has sold his birthright, and by that
    means lost all claim to the blessings promised to Abraham; those
    blessings and promises must have failed, if they had not descended
    with the purchased birthright unto the younger son, Jacob, for
    there was no other heir in Abraham's family; and if those blessings
    had failed, the purposes of God according to election must have
    failed in relation to the posterity of Israel, and the oath of
    Jehovah would have been broken, which could not be though heaven
    and earth were to pass away. (Rom. ix: 13) "As it is written, Jacob
    have I loved, but Esau have I hated." Where is it written? (Mal.
    i: 1, 2). When was it written? About 397 years before Christ,
    (according to the computation of time in Scripture margin),
    and Esau and Jacob were born about 1,773 years before Christ,
    (according to the computation of time in Scripture margin), so Esau
    and Jacob lived about 1,376 years before the Lord spoke by Malachi,
    saying, "Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated," as quoted by
    Paul. This text is often brought forward to prove that God loved
    Jacob and hated Esau before they were born, or before they had done
    good or evil; but if God did love one and hate the other before
    they had done good or evil, He has not seen fit to tell us of it,
    either in the Old or New Testament, or any other revelation: but
    this only we learn that 1,376 years after Esau and Jacob were born,
    God said by Malachi--"Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated;"
    and surely that was time sufficient to prove their works, and
    ascertain whether they were worthy to be loved or hated.

    And why did He love the one and hate the other? For the same
    reason that He accepted the offering of Abel and rejected Cain's
    offering. Because Jacob's works had been righteous, and Esau's
    wicked, and where is there a righteous father who would not do the
    same thing? Who would not love an affectionate and obedient son
    more than one who was disobedient, and sought to injure Him and
    overthrow the order of His house? (Objection). But God seeth not as
    man seeth, and He is no respecter of persons. (Acts x: 34). True,
    but what saith the next verse, "He that feareth God and worketh
    righteousness is accepted of Him;" but it does not say that he that
    worketh wickedness is accepted, and this is a proof that God has
    respect to the actions of persons; and if He did not, why should
    He commend obedience to His law? For if he had no respect to the
    actions of men, He would be just as well pleased with a wicked man
    for breaking His law as a righteous man for keeping it; and if
    Cain had done well, he would have been accepted as well as Abel
    (Gen. iv: 7), and Esau as well as Jacob, which {263} proves that
    God does not respect persons, only in relation to their acts, (see
    Matt. xxv: 34 to the end) "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit
    the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world:
    for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat," &c.; and because
    that God blessed Abel and Jacob, this would not have hindered His
    blessing Cain and Esau, if their works had been righteous like
    unto their brethren; so God's choosing one nation to blessing does
    not doom another to cursing or make them reprobate, according to
    the reprobation of God, as some suppose; "But by resisting the
    truth they became reprobate concerning the faith" (II Tim. iii:
    8); and are "abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work
    reprobate" (Titus i: 16); consequently, are not fit subjects for
    the blessings of election.

    Rom. ix: 15, "For He saith to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I
    will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have
    compassion." (See Exod. xxx: 13 to the 19) "My presence shall go
    with thee, and I will give thee rest, * * * for thou hast found
    grace in my sight, and I know thee by name, and I will make all my
    goodness to pass before thee, * * * and I will proclaim the name
    of the Lord before thee; and I will be gracious to whom I will be
    gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show mercy." (Rom.
    ix: 16) "So then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that
    runneth, but of God that showeth mercy;" having His eye at the same
    time directed towards His covenant people in Egyptian bondage. For
    the Scripture saith unto Pharoah (Exod. ix: 16, 17), "And in very
    deed for this cause have I raised thee up, for to show in thee my
    power; and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth.
    As yet exaltest thou thyself, against my people, that thou wilt not
    let them go?"

    God has promised to bring the house of Israel up out of the land
    of Egypt at his own appointed time; and with a mighty hand and
    an outstretched arm, and great terribleness (Deut. xxvi, 8.) He
    chose to do this thing that His power might be known and his name
    declared throughout all the earth, so that all nations might have
    the God of heaven in remembrance, and reverence his holy name;
    and to accomplish this it was needful that He should meet with
    opposition to give Him an opportunity to manifest His power;
    therefore He raised up a man, even Pharaoh, who, He foreknew, would
    harden his heart against God of his own free will and choice, and
    would withstand the Almighty in His attempt to deliver His chosen
    people, and that to the utmost of his ability; and he proved
    himself worthy of the choice, for he left no means unimproved
    which his wicked heart could devise to vex the sons of Abraham,
    and defeat the purposes of the Most High, which gave the God of
    Abraham an opportunity to magnify his name in the ears {264} of the
    nations, and in sight of this wicked king, by many mighty signs and
    wonders, sometimes even to the convincing of the wicked king of his
    wickedness, and of the power of God, (Exod. viii: 28, etc.) and
    yet he would continue to rebel and hold the Israelites in bondage;
    and this is what it meant by God's hardening Pharaoh's heart.
    He manifested Himself in so many glorious and mighty ways, that
    Pharaoh could not resist the truth without becoming harder; so that
    at last, in his madness, to stay the people of God, he rushed his
    hosts into the Red Sea and they were covered with the floods.

    Had not the power of God been exerted in a remarkable manner, it
    would seem as though the house of Israel must have become extinct,
    for Pharaoh commanded the midwives to destroy the sons of the
    Israelitish women as soon as they were born (Exod. i: 15, 16), and
    called them to account for saving the men children alive (verse
    18), and charged all his people saying, "Every son that is born,
    ye shall cast into the river" (verse 22), and yet God would have
    mercy on whom He would have mercy (Rom. ix: 18); for he would have
    mercy on the goodly child, Moses, when he was hid and laid in the
    flags (Exod. xi: 3) by his mother to save him from Pharaoh's cruel
    order, and caused that he should be preserved as a Prophet and
    deliverer to lead His people up to their own country; and whom He
    would He hardened, for He hardened Pharaoh by passing before him
    in mighty power and withdrawing His Spirit, and leaving him to his
    own inclination, for he had set task-masters over the Israelites
    to afflict them with their burdens, and caused them to build
    treasure cities for Pharaoh, and made them to serve with rigor;
    and made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in mortar and brick
    and all manner of service in the field (Exod. 1st chap.); besides
    destroying the men children, thus proving to the God of heaven and
    all men that he had hardened his own hard heart, until he became a
    vessel of wrath fitted for destruction (Rom, ix: 22); all this long
    before God said unto Moses, "I will harden his (Pharaoh's) heart"
    (Exod. iv: 21).

    Are men, then, to be saved by works? Nay, verily, "By grace are ye
    saved through faith, and that not of yourselves, it is the gift
    of God" (Eph. ii: 8); "Not of works, lest any man should boast"
    (v. 9); "Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
    according to His mercy He saved us" (Titus iii: 5): and yet faith
    without works is dead, being alone (James ii: 17). Was not Abraham,
    our father, justified by works (v. 21)? Shall we then be saved by
    faith? Nay, neither by faith nor works, but by works is faith made
    perfect (v. 22); but "by grace are ye saved" (Eph. ii: 8); "And if
    by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more
    grace; and if it be of works, then it is no more grace; otherwise
    works is no works" (Rom. xi: 6); "Ye {265} see then how that a man
    is justified by works, and not by faith only" (James ii: 24).

    Rom. x: 3,4, "For they (Israel) being ignorant of God's
    righteousness and going about to establish their own righteousness,
    have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God; for
    Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
    believeth." Thus the righteousness of God is made manifest in the
    plan of salvation by His crucified son; for there is none other
    name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved, but the
    name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth (Acts iv: 10, 12); but of this the
    Jews were ignorant, although they themselves crucified Him; and
    they have been going about wandering among all the nations of the
    earth ever since, for the space of eighteen hundred years, trying
    to establish their own righteousness, which is of the law of Moses,
    which law can never make the comers thereto perfect (Heb. x: i.);
    yet notwithstanding their darkness and long dispersion, there is
    a remnant, according to the election of grace (Rom. xi: 5); whom
    God will gather from among all people whither they are scattered
    and will be sanctified in them in the sight of the heathen; then
    shall they dwell in their land which God gave to His servant Jacob,
    and they shall dwell safely therein, and shall build houses and
    plant vineyards; "Yea, they shall dwell with confidence when I
    have executed judgments upon all those that despise them round
    about; and they shall know that I am the Lord their God" (Ezek.
    xxviii: 25, 26; Is. xi: 11 to 16); and when this gathering shall
    be completed, "It shall no more be said, The Lord liveth, that
    brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt, but the
    Lord liveth that brought up the children of Israel from the land
    of the north, and from all the lands whither he had driven them:
    and I will bring them again into their land that I gave unto their
    fathers" (Jer. xvi: 14 to the end).

    Rom. xi: 7. "What then? Israel hath not obtained that which he
    seeketh for; but the election hath obtained it." And why have they
    not obtained it? Because they sought it not by faith, but as it
    were by the works of the law, for they stumbled at the stumbling
    stone; as it is written, "Behold, I lay in Zion a stumbling stone
    and rock of offense" (Rom. ix: 32, 33); "to both the houses of
    Israel, for a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
    And many among them shall stumble" (Isaiah viii: 14, 15); but "have
    they stumbled that they should fall? God forbid; but rather through
    their fall, salvation is come unto the Gentiles" (Rom. xi: 11).
    "And Jerusalem shall be trodden down by the Gentiles, until the
    times of the Gentiles be fulfilled (Luke xxi: 24); and when the
    house of Israel shall be restored to their possessions in Canaan,
    it may truly be said, the election hath {266} obtained it; for the
    fulfillment of God's oath of election to Abraham as the father of
    the faithful, and the promises to His children will obtain that for
    Israel, which he has sought for in vain by the law of Moses."

    This is the election that we believe in, viz., such as we find in
    the Prophets and Apostles, and the word of the Lord Himself, and as
    we have not room to give all the quotations in full, in relation
    to election in this epistle, we would invite the Saints to examine
    the Scriptures, in connection with these quoted; and whenever they
    find election, or any other principle or blessing, given or applied
    to the house of Israel, let those principles continue with the
    house of Israel, and not apply that to Esau which belongs to Jacob;
    or to the churches of modern times which belong to the ancient
    covenant people; and always ascertain how the Lord, the Apostles
    and Prophets have applied their words, and ever continue the same
    application, and knowledge and wisdom will be added unto you; and
    in the words of the beloved Peter and Paul, we would exhort you to
    "work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God
    which worketh in you both to will and to do of His good pleasure"
    (Phil. ii: 12, 13); "Giving all diligence to make your calling and
    election sure" (2 Peter i: 10); for this is that sealing power
    spoken of in Ephesians (i: 13, 14)--"in whom ye also trusted, after
    that ye heard the word of truth; the gospel of your salvation, in
    whom also, after that ye believed ye were sealed with that Holy
    Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, until
    the redemption of the purchased possession, until the praise of His
    glory" (2 Peter i: 11); "For so an entrance shall be ministered
    unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
    Savior Jesus Christ." Amen.

_Friday, January 8_.--Elder Parley P. Pratt wrote President Sidney
Rigdon, from Manchester, England, in part as follows:

* * * * *

    As to the progress of the work of God in this county, it is
    increasing at every step. It is now prospering in Ireland and in
    Wales, as well as in Scotland and England. It is spreading into
    various new places in England. We have several hundred faithful
    preachers, and the spirit of inquiry seems to be more generally
    awakened. The clergy of the Church of England, the Methodist
    priests, the Baptist ministers, and Unitarians, are all in arms, as
    it were, against the Saints.

    The country is flooded with pamphlets, tracts, papers, &c.,
    published against us. * * * * * I must now inform you of the
    {267} fact that we have reaped the first fruits of Campbellism in
    England, at a place called Nottingham.

    _A Proclamation of the First Presidency of the Church to the Saints
    Scattered Abroad, Greeting_:

    Beloved Brethren:--The relationship which we sustain to the
    Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, renders it necessary
    that we should make known from time to time, the circumstances,
    situation, and prospects of the Church, and give such instructions
    as may be necessary for the well being of the Saints, and for the
    promotion of those objects calculated to farther their present and
    everlasting happiness.

    We have to congratulate the Saints on the progress of the great
    work of the "last days," for not only has it spread through the
    length and breadth of this vast continent, but on the continent of
    Europe, and on the islands of the sea, it is spreading in a manner
    entirely unprecedented in the annals of time. This appears the
    more pleasing when we consider, that but a short time has elapsed
    since we were unmercifully driven from the state of Missouri,
    after suffering cruelties and persecutions in various and horrid
    forms. Then our overthrow, to many, seemed inevitable, while the
    enemies of truth triumphed over us, and by their cruel reproaches
    endeavored to aggravate our sufferings. But the Lord of Hosts was
    with us, the God of Jacob was our refuge, and we were delivered
    from the hands of bloody and deceitful men; and in the state of
    Illinois we found an asylum, and were kindly welcomed by persons
    worthy the character of freemen.

    It would be impossible to enumerate all those who, in our time of
    deep distress, nobly came forward to our relief, and, like the good
    Samaritan, poured oil into our wounds, and contributed liberally
    to our necessities, and the citizens of Quincy _en masse_, and the
    people of Illinois, generally, seemed to emulate each other in
    this labor of love. We would, however, make honorable mention of
    Governor Carlin, Judge Young, General Leech, Judge Ralston, Rev.
    Mr. Young, Col. Henry, N. Bushnell, John Wood, J. N. Morris, S.
    M. Bartlett, Samuel Holmes, and J. T. Holmes, Esquires, who will
    long be remembered, by a grateful community, for their philanthropy
    to a suffering people, and whose kindness, on that occasion, is
    indelibly engraved on the tablets of our hearts in golden letters
    of love.

    We would likewise make mention of the legislators of this state,
    who, without respect to parties, without reluctance, freely,
    openly, boldly, and nobly, have come forth to our assistance, owned
    us as citizens and friends, and took us by the hand, and extended
    to us all the blessings {268} of civil, political, and religious
    liberty, by granting us, under date of December 16, 1840, one
    of the most liberal charters, with the most plenary powers ever
    conferred by a legislative assembly on free citizens, "The City of
    Nauvoo," the "Nauvoo Legion," and the "University of the City of
    Nauvoo."

    The first of these charters (that for the "City of Nauvoo") secures
    to us, in all time to come, irrevocably, all those great blessings
    of civil liberty which of right appertain to all the free citizens
    of a great civilized republic; it is all we ever claimed. What a
    contrast does the proceedings of the legislators of this state
    present when compared with those of Missouri, whose bigotry,
    jealousy, and superstition, prevailed to such an extent as to deny
    us our liberty and our sacred rights. Illinois has set a glorious
    example to the whole United States, and to the world at large,
    and has nobly carried out the principles of her Constitution, and
    the Constitution of these United States, and while she requires
    of us implicit obedience to the laws, (which we hope ever to see
    observed) she affords us the protection of law, the security of
    life, liberty, and the peaceable pursuit of happiness.

    The name of our city (Nauvoo) is of Hebrew origin, and signifies a
    beautiful situation, or place, carrying with it, also, the idea of
    rest; and is truly descriptive of the most delightful location. It
    is situated on the east bank of the Mississippi river, at the head
    of the Des Moines Rapids, in Hancock county, bounded on the east by
    an extensive prairie of surpassing beauty, and on the north, west,
    and south, by the Mississippi. This place has been objected to by
    some on account of the sickness which has prevailed in the summer
    months, but it is the opinion of Doctor Bennett, that Hancock
    county, and all the eastern and southern portions of the City of
    Nauvoo, are as healthful as any other portions of the western
    country, to acclimatized citizens; whilst the northwestern portion
    of the city has experienced much affliction from fever and ague,
    which, however, Doctor Bennett thinks can be easily remedied by
    draining the sloughs on the adjacent islands in the Mississippi.

    The population of our city is increasing with unparalleled
    rapidity, numbering more than 3,000 inhabitants. Every facility is
    afforded, in the city and adjacent country, in Hancock county, for
    the successful prosecution of the mechanical arts and the pleasing
    pursuits of agriculture. The waters of the Mississippi can be
    successfully used for manufacturing purposes to almost an unlimited
    extent.

    Having been instrumental, in the hands of our heavenly Father, in
    laying a foundation for the gathering of Zion, we would say, let
    all those who appreciate the blessings of the Gospel, and realize
    the importance of obeying the commandments of heaven, who have
    been blessed of heaven with the possession of this world's goods,
    first {269} prepare for the general gathering; let them dispose
    of their effects as fast as circumstances will possibly admit,
    without making too great sacrifices, and remove to our city and
    county; establish and build up manufactures in the city, purchase
    and cultivate farms in the county. This will secure our permanent
    inheritance, and prepare the way for the gathering of the poor.
    This is agreeable to the order of heaven, and the only principle on
    which the gathering can be effected. Let the rich, then, and all
    who can assist in establishing this place, make every preparation
    to come on without delay, and strengthen our hands, and assist in
    promoting the happiness of the Saints. This cannot be too forcibly
    impressed on the minds of all, and the Elders are hereby instructed
    to proclaim this word in all places where the Saints reside,
    in their public administrations, for this is according to the
    instructions we have received from the Lord.

    The Temple of the Lord is in process of erection here, where the
    Saints will come to worship the God of their fathers, according
    to the order of His house and the powers of the Holy Priesthood,
    and will be so constructed as to enable all the functions of the
    Priesthood to be duly exercised, and where instructions from the
    Most High will be received, and from this place go forth to distant
    lands. Let us then concentrate all our powers, under the provisions
    of our _magna charta_ granted by the Illinois legislature, at the
    "City of Nauvoo" and surrounding country, and strive to emulate
    the action of the ancient covenant fathers and patriarchs, in
    those things which are of such vast importance to this and every
    succeeding generation.

    The "Nauvoo Legion" embraces all our military power, and will
    enable us to perform our military duty by ourselves, and thus
    afford us the power and privilege of avoiding one of the most
    fruitful sources of strife, oppression, and collision with the
    world. It will enable us to show our attachment to the state and
    nation, as a people, whenever the public service requires our aid,
    thus proving ourselves obedient to the paramount laws of the land,
    and ready at all times to sustain and execute them.

    The "University of the City of Nauvoo" will enable us to teach
    our children wisdom, to instruct them in all the knowledge and
    learning, in the arts, sciences, and learned professions. We hope
    to make this institution one of the great lights of the world, and
    by and through it to diffuse that kind of knowledge which will
    be of practicable utility, and for the public good, and also for
    private and individual happiness. The Regents of the University
    will take the general supervision of all matters appertaining to
    education, from common schools up to the highest branches of a most
    liberal collegiate course. They will establish a regular system of
    education, and hand over the pupil from teacher to {270} professor,
    until the regular gradation is consummated and the education
    finished.

    This corporation contains all the powers and prerogatives of any
    other college or university in this state. The charters for the
    University and Legion are _addenda_ to the city charter, making the
    whole perfect and complete.

    Not only has the Lord given us favor in the eyes of the community,
    who are happy to see us in the enjoyment of all the rights and
    privileges of freemen, but we are happy to state that several
    of the principal men in Illinois, who have listened to the
    doctrines we promulgate, have become obedient to the faith, and
    are rejoicing in the same; among whom is John C. Bennett, M. D.,
    Quartermaster-General of Illinois. We mention this gentleman
    first, because, that during our persecutions in Missouri, he
    became acquainted with the violence we were suffering while in
    that state, on account of our religion; his sympathy for us was
    aroused, and his indignation kindled against our persecutors, for
    the cruelties practiced upon us, and their flagrant violation of
    both the law and the Constitution. Amidst their heated zeal to
    put down the truth, he addressed us a letter, tendering to us his
    assistance in delivering us out of the hands of our enemies, and
    restoring us again to our privileges, and only required at our
    hands to point out the way and he would be forthcoming, with all
    the forces he could raise for the purpose. He has been one of the
    instruments in effecting or safety and deliverance, from the unjust
    persecutions and demands of the authorities of Missouri, and also
    in procuring the city charter. He is a man of enterprise, extensive
    acquirements, and of independent mind, and is calculated to be a
    great blessing to our community.

    Dr. Isaac Galland also, who is one of our benefactors, having under
    his control a large quantity of land, in the immediate vicinity of
    our city, and a considerable portion of the city plat, opened both
    his heart and his hands, and "when we were strangers, took us in,"
    and bade us welcome to share with him in his abundance, leaving
    his dwelling house, the most splendid edifice in the vicinity, for
    our accommodation, and partook himself to a small, uncomfortable
    dwelling. He sold us his large estates on very reasonable terms,
    and on long credit, so that we might have an opportunity of paying
    for them without being distressed, and has since taken our lands
    in Missouri in payment for the whole amount, and has given us a
    clear and indisputable title for the same. And in addition to the
    first purchase, we have exchanged lands with him in Missouri to the
    amount of eighty thousand dollars. He is the honored instrument the
    Lord used to prepare a home for us, when we were driven from our
    inheritances, having given him control of vast bodies of land, and
    prepared his heart to make the use of it the Lord {271} intended he
    should. Being a man of extensive information, great talents, and
    high literary fame, he devoted all his powers and influence to give
    us a standing.

    After having thus exerted himself for our salvation and comfort,
    and formed an intimate acquaintance with many of our people, his
    mind became wrought up to the greatest feelings, being convinced
    that our persecutions were like those of the ancient Saints,
    and, after investigating the doctrines we proclaimed, he became
    convinced of the truth and of the necessity of obedience thereto,
    and, to the great joy and satisfaction of the Church, he yielded
    himself to the waters of baptism, and became a partaker with us in
    our sufferings, "Choosing rather to suffer afflictions with the
    people of God than enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season."

    In connection with these, we would mention the names of General
    James Adams, judge of probate, of Sangamon county; Dr. Green of
    Shelby county, R. D. Foster, and Sidney Knowlton, of Hancock
    county; Dr. Knight, of Putnam county, Indiana; many others of
    respectability and high standing in society, and nearly all the
    old settlers in our immediate neighborhood. We make mention of
    this that the Saints may be encouraged, and also that they may see
    that the persecutions we suffered in Missouri were but the prelude
    to a far more glorious display of the power of truth, and of the
    religion we have espoused.

    From the kind, uniform, and consistent course pursued by the
    citizens of Illinois, and the great success which has attended us
    while here, the natural advantages of this place for every purpose
    we require, and the necessity of the gathering of the Saints of the
    Most High, we would say--let the brethren who love the prosperity
    of Zion, who are anxious that her stakes should be strengthened
    and her cords lengthened, and who prefer her prosperity to their
    chief joy, come and cast in their lots with us, and cheerfully
    engage in a work so glorious and sublime, and say with Nehemiah,
    "We, His servants, will arise and build." It probably would hardly
    be necessary to enforce this important subject on the attention
    of the Saints, as its necessity is obvious, and is a subject of
    paramount importance; but as watchmen to the house of Israel--as
    shepherds over the flock which is now scattered over a vast
    extent of country, and the anxiety we feel for their prosperity
    and everlasting welfare, and for the carrying out the great and
    glorious purposes of our God, to which we have been called, we
    feel to urge its necessity, and say--Let the Saints come here;
    this is the word of the Lord, and in accordance with the great
    work of the last days. It is true, the idea of a general gathering
    has heretofore been associated with the most cruel and oppressing
    scenes, owing to our unrelenting persecutions at the hands of
    wicked and unjust men; but we hope that {272} those days of
    darkness and gloom have gone by, and, from the liberal policy of
    our state government, we may expect a scene of peace and prosperity
    we have never before witnessed since the rise of our Church, and
    the happiness and prosperity which now await us, is, in all human
    probability, incalculably great. By a concentration of action,
    and a unity of effort, we can only accomplish the great work of
    the last days which we could not do in our remote and scattered
    condition, while our interests, both temporal and spiritual, will
    be greatly enhanced, and the blessings of heaven must flow unto
    us in an uninterrupted stream; of this, we think there can be no
    question.

    The greatest temporal and spiritual blessings which always flow
    from faithfulness and concerted effort, never attended individual
    exertion or enterprise. The history of all past ages abundantly
    attests this fact. In addition to all temporal blessings, there
    is no other way for the Saints to be saved in these last days,
    [than by the gathering] as the concurrent testimony of all the
    holy Prophets clearly proves, for it is written--"They shall come
    from the east, and be gathered from the west; the north shall give
    up, and the south shall keep not back." "The sons of God shall be
    gathered from far, and His daughters from the ends of the earth."

    It is also the concurrent testimony of all the Prophets, that
    this gathering together of all the Saints, must take place before
    the Lord comes to "take vengeance upon the ungodly," and "to be
    glorified and admired by all those who obey the Gospel." The
    fiftieth Psalm, from the first to the fifth verse inclusive,
    describes the glory and majesty of that event.

    "The mighty God, and even the Lord hath spoken, and called the
    earth from the rising of the sun unto the going down thereof. Out
    of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God hath shined. Our God shall
    come, and shall not keep silence; a fire shall devour before Him,
    and it shall be very tempestuous round about Him. He shall call to
    the heavens from above, and to the earth (that He may judge the
    people). Gather my Saints together unto me; those that have made
    covenant with me by sacrifice."

    We might offer many other quotations from the Scriptures, but
    believing them to be familiar to the Saints, we forbear.

    We would wish the Saints to understand that, when they come here,
    they must not expect perfection, or that all will be harmony,
    peace, and love; if they indulge these ideas, they will undoubtedly
    be deceived, for here there are persons, not only from different
    states, but from different nations, who, although they feel a
    great attachment to the cause of truth, have their prejudices of
    education, and, consequently, it requires some time before these
    things can be overcome. Again, there {273} are many that creep in
    unawares, and endeavor to sow discord, strife, and animosity in our
    midst, and by so doing, bring evil upon the Saints. These things
    we have to bear with, and these things will prevail either to a
    greater or less extent until "the floor be thoroughly purged," and
    "the chaff be burnt up." Therefore, let those who come up to this
    place be determined to keep the commandments of God, and not be
    discouraged by those things we have enumerated, and then they will
    be prospered--the intelligence of heaven will be communicated to
    them, and they will, eventually, see eye to eye, and rejoice in the
    full fruition of that glory which is reserved for the righteous.

    In order to erect the Temple of the Lord, great exertions will be
    required on the part of the Saints, so that they may build a house
    which shall be accepted by the Almighty, and in which His power and
    glory shall be manifested. Therefore let those who can freely make
    a sacrifice of their time, their talents, and their property, for
    the prosperity of the kingdom, and for the love they have to the
    cause of truth, bid adieu to their homes and pleasant places of
    abode, and unite with us in the great work of the last days, and
    share in the tribulation, that they may ultimately share in the
    glory and triumph.

    We wish it likewise to be distinctly understood, that we claim
    no privilege but what we feel cheerfully disposed to share with
    our fellow citizens of every denomination, and every sentiment of
    religion; and therefore say, that so far from being restricted
    to our own faith, let all those who desire to locate themselves
    in this place, or the vicinity, come, and we will hail them as
    citizens and friends, and shall feel it not only a duty, but a
    privilege, to reciprocate the kindness we have received from the
    benevolent and kind-hearted citizens of the state of Illinois.

    Joseph Smith,

    Sidney Rigdon,

    Hyrum Smith,

    Presidents of the Church.

    Nauvoo, January 15th, 1841.

Footnotes:

1. For the nature of the charges see ch. xiii.

{274}



CHAPTER XV.

Reconstruction of Church Affairs at Nauvoo--Revelation--Municipal
Organization of Nauvoo--Installation of Civic and Military Officers.

_Friday, January 15, 1841_.--I published the following in the _Times
and Seasons_--

    _Reproof of John E. Page and Orson Hyde_.

    Elders Orson Hyde and John E. Page are informed that the Lord
    is not well pleased with them, in consequence of delaying their
    mission, (John E. Page in particular) and they are requested,
    by the First Presidency, to hasten their journey towards their
    destination.

_Sunday, 17_.--Elder Brigham Young preached twice in the Music Hall,
Liverpool.

_Monday, 18_.--Elders Brigham Young and Willard Richards commenced
reading the Book of Mormon, and writing an index to the English edition.

_Tuesday, 19_.--Elder Amos Fielding has baptized twenty-nine at
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, England.

I received the following revelation: [1]

    _Revelation Given to Joseph Smith at Nauvoo, January 19th, 1841_.

    Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Joseph Smith, I am
    well pleased with your offering and acknowledgments, which you have
    made, for unto this end have I raised you up, that I might show
    forth my wisdom through the weak things of the earth.

    Your prayers are acceptable before me, and in answer to them I say
    unto you, that you are now called immediately to make a solemn
    proclamation of my Gospel, and of this Stake which I have planted
    to be a {275} corner-stone of Zion, which shall be polished with
    the refinement which is after the similitude of a palace.

    This proclamation shall be made to all the kings of the world, to
    the four corners thereof; to the honorable President elect, and the
    high-minded Governors of the nation in which you live, and to all
    the nations of the earth, scattered abroad.

    Let it be written in the spirit of meekness and by the power of the
    Holy Ghost, which shall be in you at the time of the writing of the
    same;

    For it shall be given you by the Holy Ghost to know my will
    concerning those kings and authorities, even what shall befall them
    in a time to come.

    For, behold! I am about to call upon them to give heed to the light
    and glory of Zion, for the set time has come to favor her.

    Call ye, therefore, upon them with loud proclamation, and with your
    testimony, fearing them not, for they are as grass, and all their
    glory as the flower thereof which soon falleth, that they may be
    left also without excuse,

    And that I may visit them in the day of visitation, when I shall
    unveil the face of my covering, to appoint the portion of the
    oppressor among hypocrites, where there is gnashing of teeth, if
    they reject my servants and my testimony which I have revealed unto
    them.

    And again, I will visit and soften their hearts, many of them for
    your good, that ye may find grace in their eyes, that they may
    come to the light of truth, and the Gentiles to the exaltation or
    lifting up of Zion.

    For the day of my visitation cometh speedily, in an hour when ye
    think not of, and where shall be the safety of my people, and
    refuge for those who shall be left of them?

    Awake, O kings of the earth! Come ye, O, come ye, with your gold
    and your silver, to the help of my people, to the house of the
    daughters of Zion.

    And again, verily I say unto you, let my servant Robert B. Thompson
    help you to write this proclamation, for I am well pleased with
    him, and that he should be with you;

    Let him, therefore, hearken to your counsel, and I will bless him
    with a multiplicity of blessings; let him be faithful and true in
    all things from henceforth, and he shall be great in mine eyes;

    But let him remember that his stewardship will I require at his
    hands.

    And again, verily I say unto you, blessed is my servant Hyrum
    Smith, for I, the Lord, love him because of the integrity of his
    heart, and because he loveth that which is right before me, saith
    the Lord.

    Again, let my servant John C. Bennett, help you in your labor in
    sending my word to the kings and people of the earth, and stand
    by {276} you, even you my servant Joseph Smith, in the hour of
    affliction, and his reward shall not fail, if he receive counsel;

    And for his love he shall be great, for he shall be mine if he do
    this, saith the Lord. I have seen the work which he hath done,
    which I accept, if he continue, and will crown him with blessings
    and great glory.

    And again, I say unto you, that it is my will that my servant Lyman
    Wight should continue in preaching for Zion, in the spirit of
    meekness confessing me before the world, and I will bear him up as
    on eagle's wings, and he shall beget glory and honor to himself,
    and unto my name.

    That when he shall finish his work, that I may receive him unto
    myself, even as I did my servant David Patten, who is with me at
    this time, and also my servant Edward Partridge, and also my aged
    servant Joseph Smith, Sen., who sitteth with Abraham at his right
    hand, and blessed and holy is he, for he is mine.

    And again, verily I say unto you, my servant George Miller is
    without guile: he may be trusted because of the integrity of his
    heart; and for the love which he has to my testimony I, the Lord,
    love him;

    I therefore say unto you, I seal upon his head the office of a
    bishopric, like unto my servant Edward Partridge, that he may
    receive the consecrations of mine house, that he may administer
    blessing upon the heads of the poor of my people, saith the Lord.
    Let no man despise my servant George, for he shall honor me.

    Let my servant George, and my servant Lyman, and my servant John
    Snider, and others, build a house unto my name, such an one as my
    servant Joseph shall show unto them; upon the place which he shall
    show unto them also.

    And it shall be for a house for boarding, a house that strangers
    may come from afar to lodge therein; therefore let it be a good
    house, worthy of all acceptation, that the weary traveler may find
    health and safety while he shall contemplate the word of the Lord;
    and the cornerstone I have appointed for Zion.

    This house shall be a healthy habitation if it be built unto my
    name, and if the governor which shall be appointed unto it shall
    not suffer any pollution to come upon it. It shall be holy, or the
    Lord your God will not dwell therein.

    And again, verily I say unto you, let all my Saints come from afar;

    And send ye swift messengers, yea, chosen messengers, and say
    unto them: Come ye, with all your gold, and your silver, and your
    precious stones, and with all your antiquities; and with all who
    have knowledge of antiquities, that will come, may come, and bring
    the box-tree, and the fir-tree, and the pine-tree, together with
    all the precious trees of the earth;

    {277} And with iron, with copper, and with brass, and with zinc,
    and with all your precious things of the earth, and build a house
    to my name for the Most High to dwell therein;

    For there is not a place found on earth that He may come and
    restore again that which was lost unto you, or which He hath taken
    away, even the fullness of the Priesthood;

    For a baptismal font there is not upon the earth, that they, my
    Saints, may be baptized for those who are dead;

    For this ordinance belongeth to my house, and cannot be acceptable
    to me, only in the days of your poverty, wherein ye are not able to
    build a house unto me.

    But I command you, all ye my Saints, to build a house unto me; and
    I grant unto you a sufficient time to build a house unto me, and
    during this time your baptisms shall be acceptable unto me.

    But behold, at the end of this appointment, your baptisms for your
    dead shall not be acceptable unto me; and if you do not these
    things at the end of the appointment, ye shall be rejected as a
    church, with your dead, saith the Lord your God.

    For verily I say unto you, that after you have had sufficient time
    to build a house to me, wherein the ordinance of baptizing for the
    dead belongeth, and for which the same was instituted from before
    the foundation of the world, your baptisms for your dead cannot be
    acceptable unto me.

    For therein are the keys of the holy Priesthood, ordained that you
    may receive honor and glory.

    And after this time, your baptisms for the dead, by those who are
    scattered abroad, are not acceptable unto me, saith the Lord;

    For it is ordained that in Zion, and in her stakes, and in
    Jerusalem, those places which I have appointed for refuge, shall be
    the places for your baptisms for your dead.

    And again, verily I say unto you, how shall your washings be
    acceptable unto me, except ye perform them in a house which you
    have built to my name? For, for this cause I commanded Moses that
    he should build a tabernacle, that they should bear it with them in
    the wilderness, and to build a house in the land of promise, that
    those ordinances might be revealed which had been hid from before
    the world was;

    Therefore, verily I say unto you, that your anointings, and
    your washings, and your baptisms for the dead, and your solemn
    assemblies, and your memorials for your sacrifices, by the sons of
    Levi, and for your oracles in your most holy places, wherein you
    receive conversations, and your statutes and judgments, for the
    beginning of the revelations and foundation of Zion, and for the
    glory, honor, and endowment of all her municipals, are ordained by
    the ordinance of my holy house which my people are always commanded
    to build unto my holy name.

    {278} And verily I say unto you, let this house be built unto my
    name, that I may reveal mine ordinances therein, unto my people;

    For I deign to reveal unto my Church things which have been kept
    hid from before the foundation of the world, things that pertain to
    the dispensation of the fullness of times;

    And I will show unto my servant Joseph all things pertaining to
    this house, and the Priesthood thereof; and the place whereon it
    shall be built;

    And ye shall build it on the place where you have contemplated
    building it, for that is the spot which I have chosen for you to
    build it;

    If ye labor with all your might, I will consecrate that spot that
    it shall be made holy;

    And if my people will hearken unto my voice, and unto the voice of
    my servants whom I have appointed to lead my people, behold, verily
    I say unto you, they shall not be moved out of their place.

    But if they will not hearken to my voice, nor unto the voice of
    these men whom I have appointed, they shall not be blest, because
    they pollute mine holy grounds, and mine holy ordinances, and
    charters, and my holy words which I give unto them.

    And it shall come to pass, that if you build a house unto my name,
    and do not do the things that I say, I will not perform the oath
    which I make unto you, neither fulfill the promises which ye expect
    at my hands, saith the Lord;

    For instead of blessings, ye, by your own works, bring cursings,
    wrath, indignation, and judgments upon your own heads, by your
    follies, and by all your abominations, which you practice before
    me, saith the Lord.

    Verily, verily I say unto you, that when I give a commandment to
    any of the sons of men, to do a work unto my name, and those sons
    of men go with all their might, and with all they have, to perform
    that work, and cease not their diligence, and their enemies come
    upon them, and hinder them from performing that work; behold, it
    behooveth me to require that work no more at the hands of those
    sons of men, but to accept of their offerings;

    And the iniquity and transgression of my holy laws and
    commandments, I will visit upon the heads of those who hindered my
    work, unto the third and fourth generation, so long as they repent
    not, and hate me, saith the Lord God.

    Therefore for this cause have I accepted the offerings of those
    whom I commanded to build up a city and a house unto my name, in
    Jackson county, Missouri, and were hindered by their enemies, saith
    the Lord your God.

    And I will answer judgment, wrath, and indignation, wailing, and
    {279} anguish, and gnashing of teeth upon their heads, unto the
    third and fourth generation, so long as they repent not and hate
    me, saith the Lord your God.

    And this I make an example unto you, for your consolation
    concerning all those who have been commanded to do a work, and have
    been hindered by the hands of their enemies, and by oppression,
    saith the Lord your God;

    For I am the Lord your God, and will save all those of your
    brethren who have been pure in heart, and have been slain in the
    land of Missouri, saith the Lord.

    And again, verily I say unto you, I command you again to build a
    house to my name, even in this place that you may prove yourselves
    unto me that ye are faithful in all things whatsoever I command
    you, that I may bless you, and crown you with honor, immortality,
    and eternal life.

    And now I say unto you, as pertaining to my boarding house which I
    have commanded you to build for the boarding of strangers, let it
    be built unto my name, and let my name be named upon it, and let my
    servant Joseph, and his house have place therein, from generation
    to generation;

    For this anointing have I put upon his head, that his blessing
    shall also be put upon the head of his posterity after him,

    And as I said unto Abraham concerning the kindreds of the earth,
    even so I say unto my servant Joseph, in thee and in thy seed,
    shall the kindred of the earth be blessed.

    Therefore, let my servant Joseph and his seed after him have place
    in that house, from generation to generation, for ever and ever,
    saith the Lord.

    And let the name of that house be called Nauvoo House, and let it
    be a delightful habitation for man, and a resting place for the
    weary traveler, that he may contemplate the glory of Zion, and the
    glory of this, the corner-stone thereof;

    That he may receive also the counsel from those whom I have set to
    be as plants of renown, and as watchmen upon her walls.

    Behold, verily I say unto you, let my servant George Miller, and
    my servant Lyman Wight, and my servant John Snider, and my servant
    Peter Haws, organize themselves, and appoint one of them to be a
    president over their quorum for the purpose of building that house.

    And they shall form a constitution whereby they may receive stock
    for the building of that house.

    And they shall not receive less than fifty dollars for a share of
    stock in that house, and they shall be permitted to receive fifteen
    thousand dollars from any one man for stock in that house;

    {280} But they shall not be permitted to receive over fifteen
    thousand dollars stock from any one man;

    And they shall not be permitted to receive under fifty dollars for
    a share of stock from any one man in that house;

    And they shall not be permitted to receive any man as a stockholder
    in this house, except the same shall pay his stock into their hands
    at the time he receives stock;

    And in proportion to the amount of stock he pays into their hands,
    he shall receive stock in that house; but if he pays nothing into
    their hands, he shall not receive any stock in that house.

    And if any pay stock into their hands, it shall be for stock in
    that house, for himself, and for his generation after him, from
    generation to generation, so long as he and his heirs shall hold
    that stock, and do not sell or convey the stock away out of their
    hands by their own free will and act, if you will do my will, saith
    the Lord your God.

    And again, verily I say unto you, if my servant George Miller,
    and my servant Lyman Wight, and my servant John Snider, and my
    servant Peter Haws, receive any stock into their hands, in moneys
    or in properties, wherein they receive the real value of moneys,
    they shall not appropriate any portion of that stock to any other
    purpose, only in that house;

    And if they do appropriate any portion of that stock anywhere else,
    only in that house, without the consent of the stockholder, and do
    not repay fourfold for the stock which they appropriate anywhere
    else, only in that house, they shall be accursed, and shall be
    moved out of their place, saith the Lord God, for I, the Lord, am
    God, and cannot be mocked in any of these things.

    Verily I say unto you, let my servant Joseph pay stock into their
    hands for the building of that house, as seemeth him good; but my
    servant Joseph cannot pay over fifteen thousand dollars stock in
    that house, nor under fifty dollars; neither can any other man,
    saith the Lord.

    And there are others also who wish to know my will concerning them,
    for they have asked it at my hands.

    Therefore I say unto you concerning my servant Vinson Knight, if he
    will do my will, let him put stock into that house for himself, and
    for his generation after him, from generation to generation,

    And let him lift up his voice long and loud, in the midst of the
    people, to plead the cause of the poor and the needy, and let him
    not fail, neither let his heart faint, and I will accept of his
    offerings, for they shall not be unto me as the offerings of Cain,
    for he shall be mine, saith the Lord.

    {281} Let his family rejoice, and turn away their hearts from
    affliction, for I have chosen him and anointed him, and he shall be
    honored in the midst of his house, for I will forgive all his sins,
    saith the Lord. Amen.

    Verily I say unto you, let my servant Hyrum put stock into that
    house as seemeth him good, for himself and his generation after
    him, from generation to generation.

    Let my servant Isaac Galland put stock into that house, for I, the
    Lord, love him for the work he hath done, and will forgive all his
    sins; therefore, let him be remembered for an interest in that
    house from generation to generation.

    Let my servant Isaac Galland be appointed among you, and be
    ordained by my servant William Marks, and be blessed of him, to
    go with my servant Hyrum, to accomplish the work that my servant
    Joseph shall point out to them, and they shall be greatly blessed.

    Let my servant William Marks pay stock into that house, as seemeth
    him good, for himself and his generation, from generation to
    generation.

    Let my servant Henry G. Sherwood pay stock into that house,
    as seemeth him good, for himself and his seed after him from
    generation to generation.

    Let my servant William Law pay stock into that house, for himself
    and his seed after him, from generation to generation.

    If he will do my will, let him not take his family unto the eastern
    lands, even unto Kirtland; nevertheless, I, the Lord, will build
    up Kirtland, but I, the Lord, have a scourge prepared for the
    inhabitants thereof.

    And with my servant Almon Babbitt, there are many things with which
    I am not pleased; behold, he aspireth to establish his council
    instead of the council which I have ordained, even the Presidency
    of my Church, and he setteth up a golden calf for the worship of my
    people.

    Let no man go from this place who has come here essaying to keep my
    commandments.

    If they live here let them live unto me; and if they die, let them
    die unto me; for they shall rest from all their labors here, and
    shall continue their works.

    Therefore let my servant William put his trust in me, and cease to
    fear concerning his family, because of the sickness of the land.
    If ye love me, keep my commandments, and the sickness of the land
    shall redound to your glory.

    Let my servant William go and proclaim my everlasting Gospel with
    a loud voice, and with great joy, as he shall be moved upon by
    {282} my Spirit, unto the inhabitants of Warsaw, and also unto
    the inhabitants of Carthage, and also unto the inhabitants of
    Burlington, and also unto the inhabitants of Madison, and await
    patiently and diligently for further instructions at my general
    conference, saith the Lord.

    If he will do my will, let him from henceforth hearken to the
    counsel of my servant Joseph, and with his interest support the
    cause of the poor, and publish the new translation of my holy word
    unto the inhabitants of the earth;

    And if he will do this, I will bless him with a multiplicity of
    blessings, that he shall not be forsaken, nor his seed be found
    begging bread.

    And again, verily I say unto you, let my servant William be
    appointed, ordained, and anointed as a counselor unto my servant
    Joseph, in the room of my servant Hyrum; that my servant Hyrum may
    take the office of Priesthood and Patriarch which was appointed
    unto him by his father, by blessing and also by right.

    That from henceforth he shall hold the keys of the Patriarchal
    blessings upon the heads of all my people,

    That whomsoever he blesses shall be blessed, and whomsoever he
    curses shall be cursed; that whatsoever he shall bind on earth
    shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever he shall loose on earth
    shall be loosed in heaven;

    And from this time forth I appoint unto him that he may be a
    prophet, and a seer and a revelator unto my Church, as well as my
    servant Joseph.

    That he may act in concert also with my servant Joseph, and that he
    shall receive counsel from my servant Joseph, who shall show unto
    him the keys whereby he may ask and receive, and be crowned with
    the same blessing, and glory, and honor, and Priesthood, and gifts
    of the Priesthood, that once were put upon him that was my servant
    Oliver Cowdery;

    That my servant Hyrum may bear record of the things which I shall
    show unto him, that his name may be had in honorable remembrance
    from generation to generation forever and ever.

    Let my servant William Law also receive the keys by which he
    may ask and receive blessings; let him be humble before me, and
    be without guile, and he shall receive of my Spirit, even the
    Comforter, which shall manifest unto him the truth of all things,
    and shall give him in the very hour what he shall say.

    And these signs shall follow him; he shall heal the sick, he shall
    cast out devils, and shall be delivered from those who would
    administer unto him deadly poison;

    And he shall be led in paths where the poisonous serpent cannot lay
    {283} hold upon his heel, and he shall mount up in the imagination
    of his thoughts as upon eagle's wings;

    And what if I will that he should raise the dead, let him not
    withhold his voice.

    Therefore, let my servant William cry aloud and spare not, with
    joy and rejoicing, and with hosannas to Him that sitteth upon the
    throne forever and ever, saith the Lord your God.

    Behold I say unto you, I have a mission in store for my servant
    William and my servant Hyrum, and for them alone; and let my
    servant Joseph tarry at home, for he is needed; the remainder I
    will show unto you hereafter. Even so. Amen.

    And again, verily I say unto you, if my servant Sidney will serve
    me and be counselor unto my servant Joseph, let him arise and come
    up and stand in the office of his calling, and humble himself
    before me;

    And if he will offer unto me an acceptable offering, and
    acknowledgments, and remain with my people, behold, I, the Lord
    your God, will heal him that he shall be healed; and he shall lift
    up his voice again on the mountains, and be a spokesman before my
    face.

    Let him come and locate his family in the neighborhood in which my
    servant Joseph resides,

    And in all his journeyings let him lift up his voice as with the
    sound of a trump, and warn the inhabitants of the earth to flee the
    wrath to come;

    Let him assist my servant Joseph; and also let my servant William
    Law assist my servant Joseph, in making a solemn proclamation unto
    the kings of the earth, even as I have before said unto you;

    If my servant Sidney will do my will, let him not remove his family
    unto the eastern lands, but let him change their habitation even as
    I have said.

    Behold, it is not my will that he shall seek to find safety and
    refuge out of the city which I have appointed unto you, even the
    city of Nauvoo.

    Verily I say unto you, even now, if he will hearken unto my voice,
    it shall be well with him. Even so. Amen.

    And again, verily I say unto you, let my servant Amos Davis pay
    stock into the hands of those whom I have appointed to build a
    house for boarding, even the Nauvoo House;

    This let him do if he will have an interest, and let him hearken
    unto the counsel of my servant Joseph, and labor with his own hands
    that he may obtain the confidence of men;

    And when he shall prove himself faithful in all things that shall
    be entrusted unto his care, yea, even a few things, he shall be
    made ruler over many;

    {284} Let him therefore abase himself that he may be exalted. Even
    so. Amen.

    And again, verily I say unto you, if my servant Robert D. Foster
    will obey my voice, let him build a house for my servant Joseph,
    according to the contract which he has made with him, as the door
    shall be open to him from time to time.

    And let him repent of all his folly, and clothe himself with
    charity, and cease to do evil, and lay aside all his hard speeches,

    And pay stock also into the hands of the quorum of the Nauvoo House
    for himself and for his generation after him, from generation to
    generation,

    And hearken unto the counsel of my servants Joseph and Hyrum and
    William Law, and unto the authorities which I have called to lay
    the foundation of Zion, and it shall be well with him for ever and
    ever, Even so. Amen.

    And again, verily I say unto you, let no man pay stock to the
    quorum of the Nauvoo House, unless he shall be a believer in the
    Book of Mormon, and the revelations I have given unto you, saith
    the Lord your God;

    For that which is more or less than this cometh of evil, and shall
    be attended with cursings and not blessings, saith the Lord your
    God. Even so. Amen.

    And again, verily I say unto you, let the quorum of the Nauvoo
    House have a just recompense of wages for all their labors which
    they do in building the Nauvoo House, and let their wages be as
    shall be agreed among themselves, as pertaining to the price
    thereof;

    And let every man who pays stock bear his proportion of their
    wages, if it must needs be, for their support, saith the Lord;
    otherwise, their labors shall be accounted unto them for stock in
    that house. Even so. Amen.

    Verily I say unto you, I now give unto you the officers belonging
    to my Priesthood, that ye may hold the keys thereof, even the
    Priesthood which is after the order of Melchisedek, which is after
    the order of my Only Begotten Son.

    First, I give unto you Hyrum Smith, to be a Patriarch unto you, to
    hold the sealing blessings of my church, even the Holy Spirit of
    promise, whereby ye are sealed up unto the day of redemption, that
    ye may not fall, notwithstanding the hour of temptation that may
    come upon you.

    I give unto you my servant Joseph, to be a presiding elder over all
    my church, to be a translator, a revelator, a seer, and prophet.

    I give unto him for counselors my servant Sidney Rigdon, and my
    servant William Law, that these may constitute a quorum and First
    Presidency, to receive the oracles for the whole church.

    {285} I give unto you my servant Brigham Young, to be a President
    over Twelve traveling Council;

    Which Twelve hold the keys to open up the authority of my kingdom
    upon the four corners of the earth, and after that to send my word
    to every creature.

    They are Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Orson
    Hyde, William Smith, John Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff,
    Willard Richards, George A. Smith;

    David Patten I have taken unto myself; behold, his Priesthood no
    man taketh from him; but verily I say unto you, another may be
    appointed unto the same calling.

    And again, I say unto you, I give unto you a High Council, for the
    corner stone of Zion;

    Viz., Samuel Bent, Henry G. Sherwood, George W. Harris, Charles
    C. Rich, Thomas Grover, Newel Knight, David Dort, Dunbar Wilson;
    (Seymour Brunson I have taken unto myself, no man taketh his
    Priesthood, but another may be appointed unto the same Priesthood
    in his stead; and verily I say unto you, let my servant Aaron
    Johnson be ordained unto this calling in his stead); David Fullmer,
    Alpheus Cutler, William Huntington.

    And again, I give unto you Don C. Smith, to be a president over a
    quorum of High Priests;

    Which ordinance is instituted for the purpose of qualifying those
    who shall be appointed standing presidents or servants over
    different Stakes scattered abroad,

    And they may travel also if they choose, but rather be ordained for
    standing presidents, this is the office of their calling, saith the
    Lord your God.

    I give unto him Amasa Lyman, and Noah Packard, for Counselors, that
    they may preside over the quorum of High Priests of my Church,
    saith the Lord.

    And again, I say unto you, I give unto you John A. Hicks, Samuel
    Williams, and Jesse Baker, which Priesthood is to preside over
    the quorum of elders, which quorum is instituted for standing
    ministers, nevertheless they may travel, yet they are ordained to
    be standing ministers to my Church, saith the Lord.

    And again, I give unto you, Joseph Young, Josiah Butterfield,
    Daniel Miles, Henry Harriman, Zera Pulsipher, Levi Hancock, James
    Foster, to preside over the quorum of seventies,

    Which quorum is instituted for traveling elders to bear record of
    my name in all the world, wherever the traveling High Council, my
    apostles, shall send them to prepare a way before my face.

    The difference between this quorum and the quorum of elders, is
    {286} that one is to travel continually, and the other is to
    preside over the churches from time to time; the one has the
    responsibility of presiding from time to time, and the other has no
    responsibility of presiding, saith the Lord your God.

    And again, I say unto you, I give unto you Vinson Knight, Samuel H.
    Smith and Shadrach Roundy, if he will receive it, to preside over
    the bishopric; a knowledge of said bishopric is given unto you in
    the book of Doctrine and Covenants.

    And again, I say unto you, Samuel Rolfe and his counselors for
    priests, and the president of the teachers and his counselors, and
    also the president of the deacons and his counselors, and also the
    president of the stake and his counselors;

    The above offices I have given unto you, and the keys thereof, for
    helps and for governments, for the work of the ministry, and the
    perfecting of my Saints;

    And a commandment I give unto you that you should fill all these
    offices and approve of those names which I have mentioned, or else
    disapprove of them at my general conference;

    And that ye should prepare rooms for all these offices in my house
    when you build it unto my name, saith the Lord your God. Even so.
    Amen.

_Thursday, 21_.--Elders Brigham Young and Willard Richards completed
the index to the Book of Mormon, and it was immediately put in type,
which closed the printing of the first English edition.

_Sunday, 24_.--Elder Brigham Young preached twice at Liverpool on
election and reprobation.

[Sidenote: Hyrum Smith Installed as Patriarch.]

Hyrum Smith, who received the office of Patriarch in the Church, in
place of Joseph Smith, Sen., deceased, has by revelation been appointed
a Prophet and Revelator. William Law has by revelation been appointed
one of the First Presidency, in place of Hyrum Smith, appointed
Patriarch. George Miller has been appointed, by revelation, Bishop in
place of Edward Partridge, deceased.

_Saturday, 30_.--At a special conference of the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints, held at Nauvoo pursuant to public notice, I was
unanimously elected sole Trustee-in-Trust for the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints.

{287} Also Saturday the 30th and Sunday 31st, a Conference was held at
Walnut Grove, Knox county, Illinois; Elder William Smith presiding; 113
members, 14 Elders were present; several branches were represented, and
several persons baptized.

[Sidenote: First Election of Municipal Officers in Nauvoo.]

_Monday, 1_.--The first election in Nauvoo, for members of the
City Council took place, and the following persons were elected by
majorities varying from 330 to 337 votes; to wit, for Mayor, John C.
Bennett; Aldermen, William Marks, Samuel H. Smith, Daniel H. Wells,
Newel K. Whitney; Councilors, Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon,
Charles C. Rich, John T. Barnett, Wilson Law, Don Carlos Smith, John P.
Greene, Vinson Knight.

    City Of Nauvoo, Hancock County, Illinois, Feb. 1, A. D. 1841.

    _To the County Recorder of the County of Hancock_:

    Dear Sir:--At a meeting of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
    Saints, at this place on Saturday, the 30th day of January, A.
    D. 1841, I was elected sole Trustee for said Church, to hold my
    office during life (my successors to be the First Presidency of
    said Church) and vested with plenary powers, as sole Trustee in
    Trust for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, to
    receive, acquire, manage or convey property, real, personal, or
    mixed, for the sole use and benefit of said Church, agreeably to
    the provisions of an act entitled, "An Act Concerning Religious
    Societies," approved February 6, 1835.

    Joseph Smith, (L. S.)

    State Of Illinois Hancock Co., ss.

    This day personally appeared before me, Daniel H. Wells, a justice
    of the peace, within and for the county of Hancock, County
    aforesaid, Isaac Galland, Robert B. Thompson, and John C. Bennett,
    who being duly sworn, depose and say that the foregoing certificate
    of Joseph Smith is true.

    Isaac Galland,

    Robert B. Thompson

    John C. Bennett.

    Sworn to and subscribed this third day of February in the year of
    our Lord one thousand eight hundred and forty-one before me,

    Daniel H. Wells,

    Justice of the Peace.

{288} The above is recorded in the county records at Carthage, in book
No. 1, of Bonds and Mortgages, page 95, No. 87.

_Wednesday 3_.--Elder Taylor reports 160 baptized in Liverpool,
England; in Ireland about 25; in the Isle of Man, 70; Hawarden, 30.
Elder Lorenzo Snow is laboring in London.

[Sidenote: Nauvoo City Council Organized.]

The City Council of Nauvoo was organized; the opening prayer was
offered by myself, after which the Mayor-elect delivered his inaugural
address as published in the _Times and Seasons_, page 316, as follows:

    Inaugural Address.

    City Of Nauvoo, Illinois, Feb. 3rd, 1841.

    _Gentlemen of the City Council, Aldermen and Councillors_:

    Having been elected to the Mayoralty of this city by the unanimous
    suffrage of all parties and interests, I now enter upon the duties
    devolving upon me as your Chief Magistrate under a deep sense of
    the responsibilities of the station. I trust that the confidence
    reposed in me, by my fellow citizens, has not been misplaced, and
    for the honor conferred they will accept my warmest sentiments
    of gratitude. By the munificence and wise legislation of noble,
    high-minded, and patriotic statesmen, and the grace of God, we
    have been blessed with one of the most liberal corporate acts ever
    granted by a legislative assembly. As the presiding officer of
    the law-making department of the municipal government, it will be
    expected that I communicate to you, from time to time, by oral or
    written messages, for your deliberative consideration and action,
    such matters as may suggest themselves to me in relation to the
    public weal; and upon this occasion I beg leave to present the
    following as matters of paramount importance:

    The 21st section of the addenda to the 13th section of the City
    Charter, concedes to you plenary power "to tax, restrain, prohibit
    and suppress, tippling houses, dram shops," etc., etc., and I now
    recommend, in the strongest possible terms, that you take prompt,
    strong, and decisive measures to "prohibit and suppress" all such
    establishments. It is true you have the power "to tax," or license
    and tolerate, them, and thus add to the city finances; but I
    consider it much better to raise revenue by an advalorem tax on the
    property of sober men, than by licensing dram shops, or taxing the
    signs of the inebriated worshipers at the shrine of Bacchus. The
    revels of bacchanalians in the {289} houses of blasphemy and noise
    will always prove a disgrace to a moral people. Public sentiment
    will do much to suppress the vice of intemperance, and its
    concomitant evil results; but ample experience has incontrovertibly
    proven that it cannot do all--the law must be brought to the
    rescue, and an effective prohibitory ordinance enacted. This cannot
    be done at a better time than at the present. Let us commence
    correctly, and the great work of reform, at least so far as our
    peaceful city is concerned, can be summarily consummated. It would
    be difficult to calculate the vast amount of evil and crime that
    would be prevented, and the great good that would accrue to the
    public at large by fostering the cause of temperance; but suffice
    it to say that the one would be commensurate to the other. No
    sales of spirituous liquors whatever, in a less quantity than
    a quart, except in cases of sickness on the recommendation of
    a physician or surgeon duly accredited by the Chancellor and
    Regents of the University, should be tolerated. The liberty of
    selling the intoxicating cup is a false liberty--it enslaves,
    degrades, destroys; and wretchedness and want are attendant on
    every step,--its touch, like that of the poison upas, is death.
    Liberty to do good should be cheerfully and freely accorded to
    every man; but liberty to do evil, which is licentiousness, should
    be peremptorily prohibited. The public good imperiously demands
    it--and the cause of humanity pleads for help. The protecting
    aegis of the corporation should be thrown around every moral and
    religious institution of the day, which is in any way calculated to
    ennoble, or ameliorate the condition of the human family.

    The immediate organization of the University, as contemplated in
    the 24th section of the act incorporating our city, cannot be
    too forcibly impressed upon you at this time. As all matters in
    relation to mental culture, and public instruction, from common
    schools up to the highest branches of a full collegiate course in
    the arts, sciences, and learned professions, will devolve upon the
    Chancellor and Regents of the University, they should be speedily
    elected, and instructed to perfect their plan, and enter upon its
    execution with as little delay as possible. The wheels of education
    should never be clogged, or retrograde, but roll progressively from
    the Alpha to the Omega of a most perfect, liberal, and thorough
    course of university attainments. The following observations
    in relation to false education, from Alexander's Messenger, so
    perfectly accords with my feelings and views on this highly
    important subject, that I cannot do better than incorporate them in
    this message.

    "Among the changes for the worse, which the world has witnessed
    within the last century, we include that specious, superficial,
    incomplete way of doing certain things, which were formerly thought
    to be deserving of care, labor and attention. It would seem that
    appearance is now considered of more moment than reality. The
    modern mode of {290} education is an example in point. Children
    are so instructed as to acquire a smattering of everything, and as
    a matter of consequence, they know nothing properly. Seminaries
    and academies deal out their moral and natural philosophy, their
    geometry, trigonometry, and astronomy, their chemistry, botany,
    and mineralogy, until the mind of the pupil becomes a chaos; and,
    like the stomach when it is overloaded with a variety of food,
    it digests nothing, but converts the superabundant nutriment to
    poison. This mode of education answers one purpose--it enables
    people to seem learned; and seemingly, by a great many, is
    thought all sufficient. Thus we are schooled in quackery, and are
    early taught to regard showy and superficial attainments as most
    desirable. Every boarding school Miss is a Plato in petticoats,
    without an ounce of that genuine knowledge, that true philosophy,
    which would enable her to be useful in the world, and to escape
    those perils with which she must necessarily be encompassed. Young
    people are taught to use a variety of hard terms, which they
    understand but imperfectly--to repeat lessons which they are unable
    to apply--to astonish their grandmothers with a display of their
    parrot-like acquisitions; but their mental energies are clogged
    and torpified with a variety of learned lumber, most of which is
    discarded from the brain long before its possessor knows how to use
    it. This is the quackery of education.

    "The effects of the erring system are not easily obliterated. The
    habit of using words without thought, sticks to the unfortunate
    student through life, and should he ever learn to think, he
    cannot express his ideas without the most tedious and perplexing
    verbosity. This is, more or less, the fault of every writer in
    the nineteenth century. The sense is encumbered with sound. The
    scribbler appears to imagine that if he puts a sufficient number
    of words together he has done his part; and, alas! how many books
    are written on this principle. Thus literature, and even science
    itself, is overloaded with froth and flummery. Verbalizing has
    become fashionable and indispensable, and one line from an ancient
    author will furnish the materials for a modern treatise."

    Our University should be a "utilitarian" institution--and
    competent, industrious teachers and professors should be
    immediately elected for the several departments. "Knowledge is
    power,"--foster education and we are forever free! Nothing can be
    done which is more certainly calculated to perpetuate the free
    institutions of our common country, for which our progenitors
    "fought and bled, and died," than the general diffusion of
    useful knowledge amongst the people. Education should always
    be of a purely practical character, for such, and such alone,
    is calculated to perfect the happiness and prosperity of our
    fellow-citizens--ignorance, impudence, and false knowledge, are
    equally detestible,--shame and confusion follow in their train. As
    you now {291} possess the power, afford the most ample facilities
    to the Regents to make their plans complete; and thus enable them
    to set a glorious example to the world at large. The most liberal
    policy should attend the organization of the University, and equal
    honors and privileges should be extended to all classes of the
    community.

    In order to carry out the provisions of the 25th section of the
    act incorporating our city, I would recommend the immediate
    organization of the Legion. Comprising, as it does, the entire
    military power of our city, with a provision allowing any citizen
    of Hancock county to unite by voluntary enrollment, early
    facilities should be afforded the court martial for perfecting
    their plans of drill, rules, and regulations. Nothing is more
    necessary to the preservation of order and the supremacy of the
    laws, than the perfect organization of our military forces, under
    a uniform and rigid discipline and approved judicious drill; and
    to this end I desire to see all the departments and cohorts of
    the Legion put in immediate requisition. The Legion should be all
    powerful, panoplied with justice and equity, to consummate the
    designs of its projectors--at all times ready, as minute men,
    to serve the state in such way and manner as may, from time to
    time, be pointed out by the Governor. You have long sought an
    opportunity of showing your attachment to the state government
    of Illinois--it is now afforded; the Legion should maintain the
    constitution and the laws, and be ready at all times for the public
    defense. The winged warrior of the air perches upon the pole of
    American liberty, and the beast that has the temerity to ruffle her
    feathers should be made to feel the power of her talons; and until
    she ceases to be our proud national emblem we should not cease
    to show our attachment to Illinois. Should the tocsin of alarm
    ever be sounded, and the Legion called to the tented field by our
    Executive, I hope to see it able, under one of the proudest mottoes
    that ever blazed upon a warrior's shield--_Sicut patribus sit Deus
    nobis_; "as God was with our fathers, so may He be with us"--to
    fight the battles of our country, as victors, and as freemen; the
    juice of the uva, or the spirit of insubordination should never
    enter our camp,--but we should stand, ever stand, as a united
    people--one and indivisible.

    I would earnestly recommend the construction of a wing-dam in the
    Mississippi, at the mouth of the ravine at or near the head of
    Main street, and the excavation of a ship canal from that point
    to a point terminating in a grand reservoir on the bank of said
    river, east of the foot of said street, a distance of about two
    miles. This would afford, at the various outlets, the most ample
    water power for propelling any amount of machinery for mill and
    manufacturing purposes, so essentially necessary to the building
    up of a great commercial city in the heart of one of the most
    productive and delightful countries on earth. I {292} would
    advise that an agent be immediately appointed on behalf of the
    city corporation, to negotiate with eastern capitalists for the
    completion of this great work, on the most advantageous terms, even
    to the conveyance of the privilege for a term of years. This work
    finished, and the future greatness of this city is placed upon an
    imperishable basis. In addition to the great advantages that will
    otherwise accrue to the city and country by the construction of
    this noble work, it would afford the best harbor for steamboats,
    for winter quarters, on this magnificent stream.

    The public health requires that the low lands, bordering on the
    Mississippi, should be immediately drained, and the entire timber
    removed. This can and will be one of the most healthful cities
    in the west, provided you take prompt and decisive action in the
    premises. A board of health should be appointed and vested with the
    usual powers and prerogatives.

    The Governor, council of revision, and legislature of Illinois,
    should be held in everlasting remembrance by our people--they
    burst the chains of slavery and proclaimed us forever free! A vote
    of thanks, couched in the strongest language possible, should be
    tendered them in our corporate capacity; and, when this is done,
    Quincy, our first noble city of refuge, when we came from the
    slaughter in Missouri with our garments stained with blood, should
    not be forgotten.

    As the Chief Magistrate of your city I am determined to execute all
    state laws and city ordinances passed in pursuance to law, to the
    very letter, should it require the strong arm of military power
    to enable me to do so. As an officer I know no man; the peaceful,
    unoffending in the full exercise of all his civil, political, and
    religious rights, and the guilty violator of law shall be punished,
    without respect to persons.

    All of which is respectfully submitted. [2]

    John C. Bennett.

The following persons were elected by the council to their offices,
to-wit--Henry G. Sherwood, marshal; James Sloan, recorder; Robert
B. Thompson, treasurer; James Robinson, assessor; Austin Cowles,
supervisor of streets. I presented to the city council the following
resolution, which was unanimously adopted:

    {293} Resolved by the City Council of the City of Nauvoo, that the
    unfeigned thanks of this community be respectfully tendered to the
    Governor, Council of Revision, and Legislature of the state of
    Illinois, as a feeble testimonial of their respect and esteem for
    noble, high-minded, and patriotic statesmen; and as an evidence of
    gratitude for the signal powers recently conferred; also that the
    citizens of Quincy be held in everlasting remembrance, for their
    unparalleled liberality and marked kindness to our people, when in
    their greatest state of suffering and want.

I presented a bill for an ordinance concerning the University of
Nauvoo, which passed as follows:

    Sec.1. Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Nauvoo,
    that the "University of the City of Nauvoo," be, and the same
    is hereby organized by the appointment of the following Board
    of Trustees, to-wit--John C. Bennett, chancellor; William Law,
    registrar; and Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith, William
    Marks, Samuel H. Smith, Daniel H. Wells, Newel K. Whitney, Charles
    C. Rich, John T. Barnett, Wilson Law, Don Carlos Smith, John P.
    Greene, Vinson Knight, Isaac Galland, Elias Higbee, Robert D.
    Foster, James Adams, Robert B. Thompson, Samuel Bennett, Ebenezer
    Robinson, John Snider, George Miller, and Lenos M. Knight, Regents
    of the "University of the City of Nauvoo;" as contemplated in
    the 24th section of "An Act to incorporate the City of Nauvoo,"
    approved December 16, 1840.

    Sec. 2. The board named in the first section of this ordinance,
    shall hold its first meeting at the office of Joseph Smith, on
    Tuesday, the 9th day of February, 1841, at 2 o'clock p. m.

    Passed February 3, 1841.

    John C. Bennett, Mayor.

    James Sloan, Recorder.

I also presented a bill for an ordinance organizing the Nauvoo Legion,
which passed the same day, as follows:

    Sec. 1. Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Nauvoo,
    that the inhabitants of the City of Nauvoo, and such citizens of
    Hancock county as may unite by voluntary enrollment, be, and they
    are hereby organized into a body of independent military men, to be
    called the "Nauvoo Legion," as contemplated in the 25th section of
    "An Act to incorporate the City of Nauvoo," approved December 16,
    1840.

    Sec. 2. The Legion shall be, and is hereby divided into two
    cohorts; the horse troops to constitute the first cohort, and the
    foot troops to constitute the second cohort.

    {294} Sec. 3. The general officers of the Legion shall consist of a
    lieutenant-general, as the chief commanding and reviewing officer,
    and president of the court martial and Legion; a major-general,
    as the second in command in the Legion, the secretary of the
    court martial and Legion, and adjutant and inspector-general;
    a brigadier-general, as the commander of the first cohort; and
    brigadier-general, as commander of the second cohort.

    Sec. 4. The staff of the lieutenant-general shall consist of two
    principal aids-de-camp, with the rank of colonels of cavalry; and a
    guard of twelve aids-de-camp, with the rank of captain of infantry;
    and a drill officer, with the rank of colonel of dragoons, who
    shall likewise be the chief officer of the guard.

    Sec. 5. The staff of the major-general shall consist of an
    adjutant, a surgeon-in-chief, a cornet, a quarter-master, a
    paymaster, a commissary, and a chaplain, with the rank of colonels
    of infantry; a surgeon for each cohort, a quarter-master-sergeant,
    sergeant-major, and chief musician, with the rank of captains of
    light infantry, and two musicians, with the rank of captains of
    infantry.

    Sec. 6. The staff of each brigadier-general shall consist of one
    aid-de-camp, with the rank of lieutenant-colonel of infantry,
    provided that the said brigadiers shall have access to the staff of
    the major-general, when not otherwise in service.

    Sec. 7. No officer shall hereafter be elected by the various
    companies of the Legion, except upon the nomination of the
    court-martial; and it is hereby made the duty of the court-martial
    to nominate at least two candidates for each vacant office,
    whenever such vacancies occur.

    Sec. 8. The court-martial shall fill and supply all offices
    ranking between captains and brigadier-generals by granting brevet
    commissions to the most worthy company officers of the line, who
    shall thereafter take rank, and command according to the date of
    their brevets, provided that their original place in the line shall
    not thereby be vacated.

    Sec. 9. The court-martial, consisting of all the military officers,
    commissioned or entitled to commissions, within the limits of the
    city corporation, shall meet at the office of Joseph Smith, on
    Thursday, the 4th day of February, 1841, at 10 o'clock a. m.; and
    then and there proceed to elect the general officers of the Legion,
    as contemplated in the 3rd section of this ordinance.

    Sec. 10. The court-martial shall adopt for the Legion, as nearly as
    may be, and so far as applicable, the discipline, drill, uniform,
    rule, and regulations of the United States army.

    Passed February 8, 1841.

    John C. Bennett, Mayor.

    James Sloan, Recorder.

{295} Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Don C. Smith, and Charles C. Rich were
duly sworn as members of the City Council. [3]

The following addition has been made to the Charter of the Nauvoo
Legion by the legislature--

    Any citizen of Hancock county may, by voluntary enrollment, attach
    himself to the Nauvoo Legion, with all the privileges, which
    appertain to that independent military body.

I gave a general invitation to my friends to enroll themselves, so as
to have a perfect organization by the fourth of July. I was appointed
chairman of several committees, viz.: "On the Canal," "For Vacating
the Town of Commerce," "Vending Spirituous Liquors," "Code of City
Ordinances", "Board of Health," &c. Council adjourned to the 8th.

_Thursday, 4_.

    _Minutes of the Meeting which Organized the Nauvoo Legion_.

    Pursuant to an ordinance of the City Council of the City of Nauvoo,
    entitled, "An ordinance organizing the Nauvoo Legion," passed
    February 3, 1841, a court-martial, composed of the commissioned
    officers of the militia of the state of Illinois, within the city
    of Nauvoo, assembled at the office of Joseph Smith, on Thursday
    at 10 o'clock a. m., the 4th day of February, 1841: present--John
    C. Bennett, quarter-master general of the state of Illinois;
    Lieutenant-Colonel Don Carlos Smith; Captains Charles C. Rich,
    Wilson Law, Albert P. Rockwood, William Law, Titus Billings,
    Stephen Markham; first lieutenants, Francis M. Higbee, John T.
    Barnett, John D. Parker, Benjamin S. Wilber, Amos Davis; second
    lieutenants, Chancy L. Higbee, Nelson Higgins, David H. Redfield,
    Hosea Stout, Stephen Winchester, Thomas Rich; third lieutenants,
    John C. Annis, and Alexander Badlam. The court was {296} called
    to order by General Bennett. On motion, Joseph Smith and Hugh
    McFall were requested to sit in the court. The court-martial then
    proceeded to the election of the general officers of the Legion;
    whereupon Joseph Smith was duly elected lieutenant-general of
    the Nauvoo Legion, and John C. Bennett, major-general. Colonel
    Wilson Law was elected brigadier-general of the first cohort, and
    Lieutenant-Colonel Don Carlos Smith brigadier-general of the second
    cohort, by unanimous vote of the court-martial. Lieutenant-general
    Joseph Smith, after being duly sworn into office, appointed the
    following named persons for his staff, to-wit--Captain A. P.
    Rockwood to be drill officer; Captains William Law and Robert B.
    Thompson, aids-de-camp; and James Allred, Thomas Grover, C. M.
    Kreymeyer, John L. Butler, John Snider, Alpheus Cutler, Reynolds
    Cahoon, Elias Higbee, Henry G. Sherwood, Shadrack Roundy, Samuel H.
    Smith, and Vinson Knight, guards, and assistant aids-de-camp. The
    Legion, at its organization, was composed of six companies.

_Friday, 5_.--Elder Reuben Hedlock is laboring in Glasgow, Scotland.
The Church in that place numbers 55, and the spirit of enquiry
increases.

_Saturday, 6_.

    _Minutes of a Council at Brother Richard Harrison's, 72 Burlington
    Street, Liverpool, for organizing a company of Saints going to New
    Orleans on the ship "Sheffield," Captain Porter_.

    Elders Brigham Young, Willard Richards, John Taylor, and other
    officers, present. Elder Hyrum Clark was chosen president, and
    Thomas Walmsley, Miles Romney, Edward Martin, John Taylor, Francis
    Clark, and John Riley, counselors to President Clark. Edward
    Martin, clerk and historian. Peter Maughan and John Taylor were
    ordained Elders. President Clark and his counselors were blessed
    and set apart for their mission.

_Sunday, 7_.--Ship _Sheffield_ sailed from Liverpool with 235 Saints.

_Monday, 8_.--Levi Richards writes from Lugwardine--

    _To the Editor of the Star_:

    Since Stanley Hill conference, I have attended about thirty
    council meetings of Church officers, in eleven different places
    in Herefordshire, Gloucestershire, and Worcestershire, making a
    circuit of nearly one hundred miles. Union and harmony prevail
    among them, and a {297} disposition to add to their faith. New
    places are frequently opened for preaching, which is generally
    supplied. Many are baptized every week, although the ice has to
    yield its natural claims, and be put aside. The gift of healing is
    manifested to quite an extent in this region. The gift of tongues
    is received in most of the branches where I am acquainted. The
    spirit of persecution is not yet wholly cast out of the world: for
    recently preaching was held for the first time in Pendock parish,
    eight miles from Ledbury, when a congregation, respectable in
    numbers and appearance, were compelled to retire prematurely, in
    consequence of the quantity of gravel thrown upon the roof and
    against the windows. The mob were numerous, and pelted the Saints
    on their way home with mud. The meeting was held at the shop of a
    tradesman, who had been clerk of the parish, but was so fortunate
    as to obey the Gospel, and be turned out of his stewardship; and
    his wife was dismissed from her school, for the same reason, by the
    parson of the parish. More or less of the Saints are turned out of
    employ, and out of their houses, for obeying the Gospel.

[Sidenote: Nauvoo Council Opened by Prayer.]

City Council met according to adjournment and opened by prayer, which
was made a standing rule of the council. I reported a bill for the
survey of a canal through the city, which was accepted; and I was
appointed to contract for its survey. I also reported a bill for an
ordinance on temperance, which was read and laid over.

_Wednesday, 10_.--Elder James Burnham writes from Overton, Flintshire,
North Wales--

    I have organized two branches, with about 150 members; and we are
    continually baptizing, whether it be cold or hot. There is great
    opposition.

[Sidenote: The _Echo_ Company.]

_Thursday, 11_.--Elders Young, Richards, and Taylor, in council at 72
Burlington Street, Liverpool, set apart, by the laying on of hands,
Elder Daniel Browett, to take charge of a company of Saints, about to
sail for New Orleans on ship _Echo_, Captain Wood; and John Cheese,
David Wilding, James Lavender, William Jenkins, Robert Harris, and John
Ellison, to be his counselors. Robert Harris was ordained an Elder, and
Elder Browett was appointed clerk and historian of the company.

{298} _Saturday, 13_.--Elder Orson Hyde sailed from New York for
Liverpool, on his way to Jerusalem, accompanied by Elder George J.
Adams.

_Sunday, 14_.

    _Minutes of the London Conference_.

    A conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was
    held at Barrett's Academy, 57 King Square, Goswell Road, London,
    on Sunday, the 14th of February, 1841, there being present--Elders
    Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow, William Pitt,
    and four Priests. The meeting was called to order by Elder Kimball
    at 2 o'clock p. m. Moved by Elder Kimball, seconded by Elder Pitt,
    that Elder Woodruff be president of this conference; carried
    unanimously. Moved by Elder Kimball, seconded by Elder Woodruff,
    that Dr. W. Copeland be clerk; carried unanimously. The meeting
    opened by Elder Kimball with prayer and singing. The president then
    called upon the official members to represent their respective
    branches. The church at Ipswich was represented by Elder Pitt,
    as consisting of twelve members, one Elder, one Priest, and one
    Teacher. The church at Bedford was represented by Robert Williams,
    Priest, as consisting of forty-two members, one Priest, seven
    moved, two died. The church at Woolwich was represented by John
    Griffith, Priest, as consisting of six members, one Priest. The
    church in London was represented by Elder Kimball as consisting of
    forty-six members, one Elder, two Priests: excellent prospects of a
    continued increase. James Allen was ordained an Elder, and Thomas
    Barnes a Priest. Robert Williams was ordained an Elder, to preside
    over the branch at Bedford; and William Smith and John Sheffield
    were ordained Priests. Richard Bates was ordained a Priest, in the
    branch of Woolwich, and A. Painter a Teacher--all under the hands
    of Elders Kimball, Woodruff and Snow. It was then moved by Elder
    Kimball, seconded by Elder Woodruff, that Elder Snow be appointed
    president of this [the Woolwich] conference, also to take the
    superintendency of the branch in London. Much valuable instruction
    was given by Elders Kimball and Woodruff in relation to the duties
    of the official members. It was then moved by Elder Kimball,
    and seconded by Elder Snow, that this conference be adjourned
    to Sunday, 16th of May, 1841. The conference was then closed at
    half-past five, by singing and prayer.

    Dr. W. Copeland, Clerk.

_Monday, 15_.--As chairman of the committee [on the vending of
spirituous liquors] I reported a bill to the City {299} Council, which,
after a long discussion, passed into "An ordinance in relation to
temperance."

    Ordinance.

    Sec. 1. Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Nauvoo,
    that all persons and establishments whatever, in this city, are
    prohibited from vending whisky in a less quantity than a gallon, or
    other spirituous liquors in a less quantity than a quart, to any
    person whatever, excepting on the recommendation of a physician,
    duly accredited in writing, by the Chancellor and Regents of the
    University of the City of Nauvoo; and any person guilty of any act
    contrary to the prohibition contained in this ordinance, shall, on
    conviction thereof before the Mayor or municipal court, be fined
    in any sum not exceeding twenty-five dollars, at the discretion
    of said Mayor or municipal court; and any person or persons who
    shall attempt to evade this ordinance by giving away liquor, or by
    any other means, shall be considered alike amenable, and fined as
    aforesaid.

    Passed February 15, 1841.

    John C. Bennett, Mayor.

    James Sloan, Recorder.

In the discussion of the foregoing bill, I spoke at great length on the
use of liquors, and showed that they were unnecessary, and operate as a
poison in the stomach, and that roots and herbs can be found to effect
all necessary purposes.

_Tuesday, 16_.

    _Missouri's "White-washing_."

    Resolved by the Senate [of the state of Missouri], the House
    of Representatives concurring, that two thousand copies of the
    evidence taken before the examining court in relation to "Mormon"
    difficulties, and such of the letters, orders, and correspondence
    on that subject, on file in the office of the secretary of state,
    as may be selected by a joint committee of the two houses, shall be
    published in pamphlet form, under the direction of the secretary of
    state; that one copy, in lieu of the manuscript copies, heretofore
    ordered, be sent to our delegation in Congress, to be laid before
    the House to which they respectively belong, one to each member of
    Congress, and the residue be distributed among the Mormons of the
    general assembly.

    Approved February 16, 1841. [4]

{300} Is this Missouri's last struggle to retrieve her lost character
to publish to the world a one-sided statement of her robberies,
murders, and extermination which she had committed without provocation,
at a time when not one Saint was left in Missouri to tell the truth
about them?

The ship _Echo_ sailed from Liverpool for New Orleans, with 109 Saints,
led by Daniel Browett.

_Saturday, 20_.--Elder Brigham Young went to Harwarden and preached
twice on Sunday.

Elders William Kay and Thomas Richardson introduced the Gospel into the
City of Hereford.

The court-martial of the Nauvoo Legion, by a unanimous vote, adopted
the following resolutions, to-wit--

    _Legion Resolutions_.

    That no person whatever, residing within the limits of the City
    of Nauvoo, between the ages of 18 and 45 years, excepting such as
    are exempted by the laws of the United States, shall be exempt
    from military duty, unless exempted by a special act of this
    court; and the fines for neglecting or refusing to appear on the
    days of general parade were fixed at the following rates: for
    generals, $25; colonels, $20; captains, $15; lieutenants, $10; and
    musicians and privates, $5; and for company parade at the following
    rates--for commissioned officers, $5; non-commissioned officers,
    $3; musicians and privates, $2. The 1st and 6th of April, and the
    3rd of July, were fixed upon as days for general parade for this
    year.

    Ordered that Edward P. Duzette enlist and organize a band of music,
    not exceeding twenty men. It was also reported that John Scott had
    been elected captain in the place of William Law, and Lieutenant
    Hosea Stout in the place of Albert P. Rockwood, who has been
    promoted.

_Monday, 22_.--I laid before the City Council the following--

    Resolution.

    Resolved by the City Council of the City of Nauvoo, that the
    freedom of the city be, and the same hereby is, conferred on the
    present Governor, lieutenant-governor, council of revision, and
    members of both houses of the general assembly, of the state of
    Illinois, as an evidence {301} of our gratitude for their great
    liberality and kindness to this community, during the present
    winter, which was adopted unanimously.

I also presented the following bill for "An ordinance in relation to
the University."

    Ordinance.

    Sec. 1. Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Nauvoo,
    that all matters and powers whatever in relation to common schools,
    and all other institutions of learning within the City of Nauvoo
    be, and the same hereby are transferred from the City Council of
    the City of Nauvoo, to the chancellor and regents of the University
    of the City of Nauvoo.

    Passed February 22, 1841.

    John C. Bennett, Mayor.

    James Sloan, Recorder.

_Tuesday, 23_.--Elder Kington writes from Bristol, England, that eight
have been baptized in that place.

    An Act to Incorporate the Nauvoo House Association.

    Sec. 1. Be it enacted by the people of the state of Illinois,
    represented in the general assembly, that George Miller, Lyman
    Wight, John Snider, and Peter Haws, and their associates, are
    hereby declared a body corporate, under the name and style of the
    "Nauvoo House Association;" and they are hereby authorized to erect
    and furnish a public house of entertainment, to be called the
    "Nauvoo House."

    Sec. 2. The above-named George Miller, Lyman Wight, John Snider,
    and Peter Haws, and their associates, are hereby declared to be the
    trustees of the association, with full power and authority to hold
    in joint tenancy, by themselves and their successors in office, a
    certain lot in the City of Nauvoo, in the county of Hancock, and
    state of Illinois, known and designated on the plat of said city,
    as the south half of lot numbered fifty-six, for the purpose of
    erecting thereon the house contemplated in the first section of
    this act.

    Sec. 3. The said trustees are further authorized and empowered
    to obtain by stock subscription, by themselves or their duly
    authorized agents, the sum of one hundred and fifty thousand
    dollars, which shall be divided into shares of fifty dollars each.

    Sec. 4. No individual shall be permitted to hold more than three
    hundred, nor less than one share of stock, and certificates of
    stock shall {302} be delivered to subscribers, so soon as their
    subscriptions are paid in and not before.

    Sec. 5. As soon as the contemplated house shall have been completed
    and furnished, the stockholders shall appoint such agents as the
    trustees may deem necessary in the management of the affairs of
    said association.

    Sec. 6. The trustees shall have power to sue and be sued, plead and
    be impleaded in any court in this state, in the name and style of
    the "Trustees of the Nauvoo House Association."

    Sec. 7. They shall also take the general care and supervision in
    procuring materials for said house, and constructing and erecting
    the same, and further to superintend its general management, and to
    do and perform all matters and things which may be necessary to be
    done, in order to secure the interest and promote the objects of
    this association.

    Sec. 8. This association shall continue twenty years from the
    passage of this act, and the house herein provided for shall be
    kept for the accommodation of strangers, travelers, and all other
    persons who may resort therein for rest and refreshment.

    Sec. 9. It is moreover established as a perpetual rule of said
    house, to be observed by all persons who may keep or occupy the
    same that spirituous liquors of every description are prohibited,
    and that such liquor shall never be vended as a beverage, or
    introduced into common use, in said house.

    Sec. 10. And whereas Joseph Smith has furnished the said
    association with the ground whereon to erect said house, it is
    further declared that the said Smith and his heirs shall hold, by
    perpetual succession, a suite of rooms in the said house, to be set
    apart and conveyed in due form of law to him and his heirs by the
    said trustees, as soon as the same are completed.

    Sec. 11. The Board of Trustees shall appoint one of their number as
    president thereof.

    Approved February 23, 1841.

    Thomas Carlin,

    Governor.

    W. L. D. Ewing,

    Speaker of the House of Representatives.

    S.H. Anderson,

    Speaker of the Senate.

    State of Illinois,

    Office of Secretary of State, s. s.

    I, Stephen A. Douglas, Secretary of State, do hereby certify the
    {303} foregoing to be a true and perfect copy of the enrolled law
    on file in my office.

    Witness my hand and the seal of State.

    Springfield, February 24, A. D. 1841.

    [SEAL.]

    S. A. Douglas,

    Secretary of State.

    An Act to Incorporate the Nauvoo Agricultural and Manufacturing
    Association in the County of Hancock.

    Sec. 1. Be it enacted by the people of the state of Illinois,
    represented in the general assembly, that Sidney Rigdon, George
    W. Robinson, Samuel James, Wilson Law, Daniel H. Wells, Hyrum
    Smith, George Miller, William Marks, Peter Haws, Vinson Knight,
    John Scott, Don Carlos Smith, William Huntington, Sen., Ebenezer
    Robinson, Robert B. Thompson, William Law, James Allred, John T.
    Barnett, Theodore Turley, John C. Bennett, Elias Higbee, Isaac
    Higbee, Joseph Smith, Alpheus Cutler, Israel Barlow, R. D. Foster,
    John F. Olney, John Snider, Leonard Soby, Orson Pratt, James
    Kelley, Sidney A. Knowlton, John P. Greene, John F. Weld, and
    their associates and successors, are hereby constituted a body
    corporate and politic, by the name of "The Nauvoo Agricultural and
    Manufacturing Association," and by that name shall be capable of
    suing and being sued, pleading and being impleaded, answering and
    being answered, in all courts and places, and may have a common
    seal, and may alter the same at pleasure.

    Sec. 2. The sole object and purpose of said association shall be
    for the promotion of agriculture and husbandry in all its branches,
    and for the manufacture of flour, lumber, and such other useful
    articles as are necessary for the ordinary purposes of life.

    Sec. 3. The capital stock of said association shall be one hundred
    thousand dollars, with the privilege of increasing it to the sum
    of three hundred thousand dollars, to be divided into shares of
    fifty dollars, which shall be considered personal property, and
    be assignable in such manner as the said corporation may, by its
    by-laws, provide; which capital stock shall be exclusively devoted
    to the object and purposes set forth in the second section of this
    act, and to no other object and purposes, and to the same end the
    said corporation shall have power to purchase, hold, and convey
    real estate, and other property, to the amount of its capital.

    Sec. 4. Said corporation shall have power, by the trustees, or a
    majority of them present at any regularly called meeting, to make
    by-laws for its own government, for the purpose of carrying out
    the objects {304} of this association, provided the same are not
    repugnant to the laws and constitution of this state, or of the
    United States.

    Sec. 5. Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and William Law shall be
    commissioners to receive subscriptions for, and distribute said
    capital stock for said corporation; said commissioners, or a
    majority of them, shall, within six months after the passage of
    this act, either by themselves or their duly appointed agents, open
    a subscription book for said stock at such times and places as they
    shall appoint, and at the time of subscription for such stock, at
    least ten per cent upon each share subscribed for, shall be paid
    to said commissioners, or their duly appointed agents; and the
    remainder of said stock, so subscribed for, shall be paid in such
    sums, and at such times, as shall be provided for by the by-laws of
    said corporation.

    Sec. 6. In case the stock of said corporation shall not all
    be taken up within one year from the passage of this act, the
    duties of said commissioners shall cease, and the trustees of
    said corporation, or a quorum thereof, may thereafter receive
    subscriptions to said stock, from time to time, until the whole
    shall be subscribed.

    Sec. 7. The stock, property, and concerns of said corporation
    shall be managed by twenty trustees, who shall be stockholders of
    said corporation, any five of whom, to be designated by a majority
    of the trustees, shall form a quorum for the transaction of all
    ordinary business of said corporation, the election of which
    trustees shall be annual. The first mentioned twenty persons, whose
    names are recited in the first section of this act, shall be the
    first trustees of said corporation, and shall hold their offices
    until the first Monday in September, A. D. 1841, and until others
    shall be elected in their places.

    Sec. 8. The trustees of said corporation for every subsequent year
    shall be elected on the first Monday in September, in each and
    every year, at such place as the trustees for the time being shall
    appoint, and of which election they shall give at least fifteen
    days previous notice by advertisement in some newspaper, in or near
    the City of Nauvoo. At every election of trustees, each stockholder
    shall be entitled to one vote on each share of stock owned by
    him: provided that no stockholder shall be entitled to more than
    twenty votes, and said stockholders, may vote either in person or
    by proxy. The election for trustees shall be conducted in such
    manner as shall be pointed out by the by-laws of said corporation,
    and whenever a vacancy shall happen by death, resignation, or
    otherwise, among the trustees, the remaining trustees shall have
    power to fill such vacancy, until the next general election for
    trustees.

    Sec. 9. The trustees of said corporation, as soon as may be, after
    their appointment or election under this act, shall proceed to
    elect, {305} out of their number, a president, treasurer, and
    secretary, who shall respectively hold their offices during one
    year, and until others shall be elected to fill their places, and
    whose duties shall be defined and prescribed by the by-laws of the
    corporation; and said trustees shall also appoint such agents and
    other persons as may be necessary to conduct the proper business,
    and accomplish the declared objects of said corporation, and shall
    likewise have power to fill any vacancy occasioned by the death,
    resignation, or removal of any officer of said corporation.

    Sec. 10. This act shall be construed as a public act, and continue
    in force for the period of twenty years. And the trustees appointed
    under the provisions of this act, shall hold their first meeting at
    the City of Nauvoo, on the first Monday of April, A. D. 1841.

    Approved February 27, 1841.

    Thomas Carlin,

    Governor.

    W. L. D. Ewing,

    Speaker of the House of Representatives.

    S. H. Anderson.

    Speaker of the Senate.

    State of Illinois, Office of Secretary of State.

    I, Lyman Trumbull, Secretary of State, do hereby certify the
    foregoing to be a true and perfect copy of the enrolled law on the
    file in my office.

    Given Under My Hand And Seal Of State, Springfield, March 10, 1841.

    Lyman Trumbull,

    Secretary of State.

_Wednesday, 24_.--Elder Brigham Young returned to Liverpool, and on the
25th attended a patriarchal blessing meeting at Brother Dumville's.
Father Melling officiated; Elder James Whitehead, scribe.

_Saturday, 27_.--President Brigham Young went to Manchester, and
preached in Lombard Street room on Sunday, the 28th.

[Sidenote: Division of Nauvoo into Municipal Wards.]

_Monday, March 1_.--The City Council divided the city into four wards,
at my suggestion, to-wit: all the district of country within the city
limits, north of the center of Knight street, and west of the center of
Wells street, shall constitute the first ward. North of the center of
Knight street and east of the center of Wells street, the second ward.
South {306} of the center of Knight street, and east of the center of
Wells street, the third ward. South of the center of Knight street, and
west of the center of Wells street, the fourth ward.

I attended the City Council, and presented a bill for "An ordinance in
relation to Religious Societies."

    _Ordinance on Religious Liberty in Nauvoo_.

    Sec. 1. Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of
    Nauvoo, that the Catholics, Presbyterians, Methodists, Baptists,
    Latter-day Saints, Quakers, Episcopals, Universalists, Unitarians,
    Mohammedans, and all other religious sects and denominations
    whatever, shall have free toleration, and equal privileges, in this
    city; and should any person be guilty of ridiculing, and abusing
    or otherwise depreciating another in consequence of his religion,
    or of disturbing or interrupting any religious meeting within the
    limits of this city, he shall, on conviction thereof before the
    Mayor or Municipal Court, be considered a disturber of the public
    peace, and fined in any sum not exceeding five hundred dollars, or
    imprisoned not exceeding six months, or both, at the discretion of
    said Mayor or Court.

    Sec. 2. It is hereby made the duty of all Municipal officers to
    notice and report to the Mayor any breach or violation of this,
    or any other ordinance of this city, that may come within their
    knowledge, or of which they may be advised; and any officer
    aforesaid, is hereby fully authorized to arrest all such violators
    of rule, law and order, either with or without process.

    Passed March 1, 1841.

    John C. Bennett, Mayor.

    James Sloan, Recorder.

I also presented a bill as follows:

    _An Ordinance in Relation to Public Meetings_.

    Sec. 1. Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Nauvoo,
    that in order to guarantee the constitutional right of free
    discussion upon all subjects, the citizens of this city, may
    from time to time peaceably assemble themselves together for all
    peaceable or lawful purposes whatever; and should any person
    be guilty of disturbing or interrupting any such meeting or
    assemblage, he shall on conviction thereof before the Mayor or
    Municipal Court, be considered a disturber of the public peace,
    and fined in any sum not exceeding five hundred {307} dollars, or
    imprisoned not exceeding six months, or both, at the discretion of
    said mayor or court.

    Sec. 2. Should any person be guilty of exciting the people to riot
    or rebellion, or of participating in a mob, or any other unlawful
    riotous or tumultuous assemblage of the people, or of refusing to
    obey any civil officer, executing the ordinances of the city, or
    the general laws of the state or United States, or of neglecting or
    refusing to obey promptly, any military order for the due execution
    of said law or ordinances, he shall, on conviction thereof as
    aforesaid, be fined or imprisoned, or both, as aforesaid.

    Passed March 1, 1841.

    John C. Bennett, Mayor.

    James Sloan, Recorder.

I also offered a bill for "An ordinance, creating certain additional
City Officers."

    Ordinance.

    Sec. 1. Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Nauvoo,
    that in addition to the city officers heretofore elected, there
    shall be elected by the City Council, one high constable for each
    ward; one surveyor and engineer, one market master, one weigher
    and sealer, and one collector for the city, whose duties shall
    hereafter be defined by ordinance.

    Passed March 1, 1841.

    John C. Bennett, Mayor.

    James Sloan, Recorder.

I presented the following report:

    Committee's Report.

    Your committee, to whom was referred that portion of the address
    of his honor, the Mayor, which recommended the propriety of
    vacating the town plats, Commerce, and the City of Commerce, and
    incorporating them with the city plat of Nauvoo, would respectfully
    report--That they consider the recommendation contained in the
    address as one of great importance to the future welfare and
    prosperity of this city, and if carried into effect would make the
    streets regular and uniform, and materially tend to beautify this
    city. We would therefore respectfully recommend that the survey of
    the City of Nauvoo be carried through the town plats of Commerce
    and the City of Commerce, as soon as it may be practicable.

    We would therefore recommend to the council the passage of the
    following resolution--That the town plats of Commerce, and Commerce
    City be vacated, and that the same stand vacated from this time
    forth, {308} and forever; and that the same be incorporated with
    the City of Nauvoo, from this time henceforth and forever.

    All of which is respectfully submitted.

    Joseph Smith, Chairman.

The report was received and adopted, and an ordinance passed
accordingly.

A vote of thanks, and the freedom of the city were conferred on the
Honorable Richard M. Young, United States Senator for Illinois.

_Tuesday, 2_.--Elder Brigham Young visited Oldham, and returned on
Wednesday, 3rd, to Manchester. Elders Orson Hyde and George J. Adams
arrived in Liverpool.

_Thursday, 4_.--Elder Willard Richards left Liverpool for Preston, and
was followed by Elders Hyde, Adams, and Fielding on the 5th.

General William Henry Harrison was inaugurated President of the United
States.

_Friday, 5_.--Elder Parley P. Pratt removed the _Star_ office to 47
Oxford Road, Manchester.

_Sunday, 7_.--Elders Young and Kimball preached at the Carpenter's
Hall, Manchester.

[Sidenote: Appointment of City Officers.]

_Monday, 8_.--I attended the City Council. The following appointments
were made, viz: Alanson Ripley, city surveyor; Theodore Turley, weigher
and sealer; James Robinson, assessor; Stephen Markham, market master;
James Allred was sworn supervisor of streets, and James Allred, Dimick
B. Huntington, and George Morey, high constables.

I gave my views on several local measures proposed by the council.

_Wednesday, 10_.

    _Letter of Brigham Young to the Editor of the Star--On Family
    Prayer_.

    Liverpool, March 10, 1841.

    _To the Editor of the Star_:

    Dear Brother:--I feel anxious to address a few lines to you, on the
    subject of family prayer (and shall feel obliged by your inserting
    the {309} same in your next _Star_), for the purpose of imparting
    instruction to the brethren in general. Having traveled through
    many branches of the Church in England, I have found it to be a
    general custom among the brethren I visited, that when any of the
    Traveling Elders are present, they wait for the Elder to go forward
    in family prayer, instead of attending to that duty themselves.
    That is not right; and I would say to them that it would be
    better for them to understand their duty on this subject. My dear
    brethren, remember that the Lord holds all of us responsible for
    our conduct here. He held our father Adam responsible for his
    conduct, but no more than He does us, in proportion to the station
    we hold. The kings of the earth will have to give an account to
    God, for their conduct in a kingly capacity. Kings are heads of
    nations, governors are heads of provinces; so are fathers or
    husbands governors of their own houses, and should act accordingly.
    Heads of families should always take the charge of family worship,
    and call their family together at a seasonable hour, and not wait
    for every person to get through with all they may have to say or
    do. If it were my prerogative to adopt a plan for family prayer,
    it would be the following: Call your family or household together
    every morning and evening, previous to coming to the table, and
    bow before the Lord to offer up your thanksgiving for His mercies
    and providential care of you. Let the head of the family dictate;
    I mean the man, not the woman. If an Elder should happen to be
    present, the head of the house can call upon him, if he chooses so
    to do, and not wait for a stranger to take the lead at such times;
    by so doing we shall obtain the favor of our Heavenly Father, and
    it will have a tendency to teach our children to walk in the way
    they should go, which may God grant for Christ's sake. Amen.

    Brigham Young.

Governor Carlin issued the following Commission--

    Appointment of Joseph Smith Lieutenant-General of the Nauvoo Legion.

    _Thomas Carlin, Governor of the State of Illinois, to all to whom
    these presents shall come: Greeting_--

    Know ye that Joseph Smith, having been duly elected to the office
    of lieutenant-general, Nauvoo Legion, of the militia of the
    State of Illinois, I, Thomas Carlin, governor of said state, do
    commission him lieutenant-general of the Nauvoo Legion, to take
    rank from the fifth day of February, 1841. He is, therefore,
    carefully and diligently to discharge the duties of said office,
    by doing and performing all manner of things thereunto belonging;
    and I do strictly require all officers and soldiers {310} under his
    command to be obedient to his orders: and he is to obey such orders
    and directions as he shall receive, from time to time, from the
    commander-in-chief or his superior officer.

    In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and caused the
    great seal of state to be hereunto affixed. Done at Springfield,
    this tenth day of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
    hundred and forty-one, and of the independence of the United States
    the sixty-fifth.

    By the Governor,

    [SEAL]

    Thomas Carlin.

    Lyman Trumball,

    Secretary of State.

The commission was endorsed on the back as follows--

    Headquarters, Nauvoo Legion, City of Nauvoo, Illinois, March 15,
    1841--Oath of office administered by me, the day and year above
    written.

    John C. Bennett,

    Major-General of the Nauvoo Legion.

_Thursday, 11_.--Elders Young, Kimball, Richards, and Taylor met in
Liverpool.

_Monday, 15_.--I attended the City Council, and took part in the
discussion concerning Mr. Annis' mill, in the southwest part of the
city.

Elder Wilford Woodruff attended a conference at Gadfield Elm; 408
members in eighteen branches represented.

_Thursday, 16_.--Elder George A. Smith attended a conference at
Macclesfield, which branch contains ninety one members, one Elder, six
Priests, five Teachers, and three Deacons. In consequence of incessant
preaching, his lungs are much affected.

_Wednesday, 17_.--Ship _Alesto_ sailed from Liverpool for New Orleans,
with 54 Saints, led by Elders Thomas Smith and William Moss.

Elders Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, and Father Melling went to
Preston; Elders Young and Hedlock to Hawarden, and George A. Smith to
Leek.

_Thursday, 18_.--Elder George A. Smith attended a {311} council of
the officers and members of the Church at Leek, numbering sixty-three
members, one Elder, six Priests, two Teachers, and two Deacons. Stephen
Nixon was ordained an Elder; and John Hudson, Jacob Gibson, and Joseph
Knight Priests; and Frederick Rushton and Edwin Rushton, Teachers.

_Saturday, 20_.

    _An Inquiry_.

    City Of Nauvoo, March 20, 1841.

    Brother William Allred, Bishop of the stake at Pleasant Vale, and
    also Brother Henry W. Miller, president of the stake at Freedom,
    desire President Joseph Smith to inquire of the Lord His will
    concerning them.

I inquired of the Lord concerning the foregoing question, and received
the following answer--

    _Revelation_.

    Let my servants, William Allred and Henry W. Miller, have an agency
    for the selling of stock for the Nauvoo House, and assist my
    servants Lyman Wight, Peter Haws, George Miller, and John Snider,
    in building said house; and let my servants William Allred and
    Henry W. Miller take stock in the house, that the poor of my people
    may have employment, and that accommodations may be made for the
    strangers who shall come to visit this place, and for this purpose
    let them devote all their properties, saith the Lord.

About this time I received a revelation, given in the City of Nauvoo,
in answer to the following interrogatory--"What is the will of the
Lord, concerning the Saints in the Territory of Iowa?" [5]

    _Revelation_.

    "Verily, thus saith the Lord, I say unto you, if those who call
    themselves by my name, and are essaying to be my Saints, if they
    will do my will and keep my commandments concerning them; let them
    gather themselves together, unto the place which I shall appoint
    unto them by my servant Joseph, and build up cities unto my name,
    that they may be prepared for that which is in store for a time to
    come. Let them build up a city unto my name upon the land opposite
    to the City of {312} Nauvoo, and let the name of Zarahemla be named
    upon it. And let all those who come from the east, and the west,
    and the north, and the south, that have desires to dwell therein,
    take up their inheritances in the same, as well as in the City of
    Nashville, or in the City of Nauvoo, and in all the stakes which I
    have appointed, saith the Lord."

_Sunday, 21_.--Elder George A. Smith preached at Leek, and confirmed
one.

[Sidenote: Organization of the Lesser Priesthood at Nauvoo.]

The Lesser Priesthood was organized in the City of Nauvoo, March 21,
1841, by Bishops Whitney, Miller, Higbee, and Knight. Samuel Rolf
was chosen president of the Priests' quorum, and Stephen Markham and
Hezekiah Peck, his counselors. Elisha Everett was chosen president
of Teachers, and James W. Huntsman and James Hendricks, counselors.
Phinehas R. Bird was chosen president of Deacons, and David Wood and
William W. Lane counselors.

Footnotes:

1. See Doctrine and Covenants, section cxxiv.

2. The foregoing speech is not printed in the "History of Joseph
Smith" as published in the _Deseret News_ and _Millennial Star_, but
such is the prominence of John C. Bennett in the period of the history
now reached, and such the despicable part he later plays, that, as
affording an insight into his character, the speech becomes important,
hence given here _in extenso_, as it was published in the _Times and
Seasons_, Vol. II, No. 8.

3. Following is the form of oath taken:

We, Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Don C. Smith, and Charles C. Rich, do
solemnly swear in the presence of Almighty God that we will support the
Constitution of the United States, and of the State of Illinois, and
that we will well and truly perform the duties of councilors of the
City of Nauvoo, according to law, and the best of our abilities.

Joseph Smith,

Hyrum Smith,

Don C. Smith,

Charles C. Rich.

December 3, 1841.

4. For a proper characterization of this document see Vol. III, this
History, p. 256.

5. See Doctrine and Covenants, section cxxv.

{313}



Chapter XVI.

The First Foreign Mission of the Church 1837-1841.

_Tuesday, March 23, 1841_.--Elder Young returned to Liverpool, and
Elder Richards wrote the following history of the "Mission to England,
or the first foreign mission of the Latter-day Saints."

    _History of the British Mission_.

    About the first of June, 1837, Elder Heber C. Kimball was called by
    the Spirit of Revelation, and set apart by the First Presidency of
    the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, then at Kirtland,
    Ohio, North America, to preside over a mission to England,
    accompanied by Elder Orson Hyde, who was set apart for the same
    work at the same time. In a few days Brother Joseph Fielding,
    Priest, was set apart; and on the eve of the 12th, Elder Willard
    Richards, (having been absent several months on a long journey, and
    having returned the day previous) was called and set apart for the
    same mission.

    The following morning, Tuesday, 13th, these brethren gave the
    parting hand, bid farewell to home, and, without purse or scrip,
    started for England. They were accompanied twelve miles to Fairport
    on Lake Erie by Elders Brigham Young, John P. Greene and Brother
    Levi Richards, and Sisters Kimball, Greene and Fielding (Brother
    R. B. Thompson and wife accompanied the mission to Buffalo, and
    Brother Fitch Brigham to Utica) and others with whom they parted in
    the afternoon, and went on board a steamer for Buffalo; where they
    arrived next day.

    At this place the brethren expected to receive some means
    from Canada, to assist them on their journey, but they were
    disappointed. In the evening they took passage on a canal boat,
    and arrived in Albany on the 19th (Elder Hyde having gone forward
    to New York from Rochester.) Brother Fielding proceeded to New
    York, and on the 20th Elder Kimball accompanied Elder Richards to
    his father's house in Richmond, Massachusetts, thirty miles east,
    where they spent one day, and having received some assistance
    from his friends, bade them {314} farewell for the last time (his
    father and mother having since died, also a sister whom he had
    left in Kirtland) and on the 21st returned to Albany, and arrived
    in New York on the 22nd, where they found Brothers Orson Hyde and
    Fielding, also Elders John Goodson and Isaac Russell, John Snider,
    Priest,(who had come from Canada to join the mission) anxiously
    awaiting their arrival, so that they might take passage on the
    _United States_, which was to sail next day, but they arrived too
    late.

    In New York Elder Richards received some further means, quite
    providentially, and on the 23rd the brethren engaged passage to
    Liverpool, on board the _Garrick_, which was to sail on the 1st of
    July.

    In the meantime the brethren received every possible assistance
    from Elder Elijah Fordham. At that time he was the only member of
    the Church residing in the city [New York], and having no house of
    his own, he procured his father's storehouse for the use of the
    brethren, where they lodged on the floor, amid straw and blankets,
    one week, eating their cold morsel, and conversing with the people
    as they had opportunity; for no place could be procured to preach
    in, and there was no one to receive them into their houses.

    Sunday, the 25th, the brethren held a council at their lodgings
    (Mr. Fordham's store), and organized ready for taking their
    departure.

    On the 29th the brethren sealed, superscribed, and forwarded one
    hundred and eighty of Elder Orson Hyde's "Timely Warnings" to the
    ministers of the different denominations in the city, and went
    on board the _Garrick_, which hauled out into the river and cast
    anchor.

    July 1st, the ship weighed anchor and was towed to Sandy Hook by
    a steamer, where she spread sail, and in four hours and a half
    was out of sight of land. With the exception of a strong wind on
    the 12th, there was generally a gentle breeze from the northwest
    during the voyage. On the 16th, Elder Orson Hyde preached on the
    aft quarter deck. On the 18th Cape Clear was visible (eighteen days
    out of sight of land;) and on the morning of the 20th, the brethren
    landed in Liverpool twenty days from New York. Here Elders Kimball,
    Hyde, and Richards found themselves on a foreign shore, surrounded
    by strangers, without the first farthing in their possession; but
    the brethren unitedly took lodgings in a private house in Union
    Street, till after the inspection of the ship; and on Saturday,
    the 22nd, took coach for Preston. When they had alighted from the
    coach, and were standing by their trunks in front of the hotel in
    Preston, a large flag was unfurled over their heads on which was
    printed in golden letters, "_Truth will prevail_;" at the sight of
    which their hearts rejoiced, and they cried aloud, "Amen, thanks be
    unto God, Truth Will Prevail."

    {315} Brother Joseph Fielding lodged with his brother, Rev.
    James Fielding, then a preacher in Vauxhall-road Chapel, and the
    remainder of the brethren took lodgings in St. Wilford Street, Fox
    Street. The same evening the Elders visited the Rev. Mr. Fielding,
    by his request at his lodgings. He had previously been apprized of
    the coming forth of this work in America, through the medium of
    letters from his relatives and others and had requested his church
    to pray that God would send them His servants, and exhorted his
    people to receive their message when they should come.

    Sunday the 28th. As they had no place in which to preach, the seven
    brethren went to Vauxhall Chapel to hear the Rev. Mr. Fielding;
    and at the close of the morning service, Mr. Fielding gave public
    notice that an Elder of the Latter-day Saints would preach in the
    afternoon in his pulpit. This was voluntary with Mr. Fielding as no
    one had requested the privilege; and in the afternoon, according to
    the notice, Elder Kimball gave a brief history of the rise of the
    Church and the first principles of the Gospel, and Elder Hyde bore
    testimony; after which the Rev. Mr. Fielding requested the brethren
    to give out an appointment for the evening, when Elder Goodson
    preached, and Elder Joseph Fielding bore testimony.

    At the close Mr. Fielding again gave leave for preaching at the
    same place on Wednesday evening, when Elder Hyde preached and Elder
    Richards bore testimony; and from that time the Rev. Mr. Fielding
    closed his doors against the Elders and began to oppose the work,
    and stated that the Elders promised to say nothing about baptism
    in their preaching before he ever consented to let them preach in
    his pulpit; whereas the subject of the Elders preaching in his
    chapel had not been named between the parties, before Mr. Fielding
    gave out the public appointment before referred to: much less (if
    possible) that they would "say nothing about baptism."

    Nine of Mr. Fielding's members offered themselves for baptism; and
    Mr. Fielding presented himself before the Elders, and forbade their
    baptizing them, but he received for answer, that "they were of
    age and could act for themselves." On Sunday, the 30th, they were
    baptized under the hands of Elder Kimball; Brother George D. Watt
    being the first who offered himself for baptism in England, and is
    now an Elder laboring in Edinburgh, Scotland.

    Elder Russell preached in the market place in the afternoon, and
    from that day the doors of private houses were opened on almost
    every hand for the Elders.

    July 31st, a council of the Elders decided that Elders Goodson and
    Richards should go on a mission to Bedford, and Elder Russell and
    Priest Snider on a mission to Alston, Cumberland; and after a night
    {316} of prayer, praise and thanksgiving, the brethren took their
    departure on the morning of the first of August for their several
    stations.

    The Rev. Mr. Fielding continued to oppose the doctrine of baptism
    for a season; but finding that he was likely to lose all his "best
    members," he offered to baptize them himself; but they being aware
    that he had no authority, declined his friendly offer, whereupon
    he engaged the Rev. Mr. Giles, a Baptist minister in Preston,
    of as little authority as himself, to do the baptizing for his
    flock; but this iniquitous scheme succeeded little better than the
    other--only one coming forward to his baptism, so far as we have
    heard. Mr. Fielding's people also stated that he acted the part of
    a hypocrite and deceived them, when he read the letters to them in
    public, which he received from America, by keeping back that part
    which treated on baptism, which, since the foregoing failure he has
    opposed.

    Elders Kimball and Hyde, and Priest Fielding continued to preach
    daily in different parts of Preston, and on Wednesday and Thursday
    (August 2nd and 3rd), the meetings were attended by Miss Jeanetta
    Richards who was visiting her friends in Preston, and on Friday she
    requested baptism, which was attended to by Elder Kimball, after
    which she was confirmed at the water side by Elders Kimball and
    Hyde, it being the first confirmation in a foreign land in these
    last days.

    The day following Sister Richards returned home to her friends,
    and informed her father, the Rev. Joseph Richards, an Independent
    minister at Walker-fold, Chaidgely, whom she had found at Preston,
    what she had done, and requested him to send for Elder Kimball to
    preach in his chapel. Mr. Richards complied with his daughter's
    request. Elder Kimball arrived at Walker-fold Saturday eve, August
    12, and the day following preached three times in Mr. Richards'
    pulpit, to crowded assemblies; also twice during the week, and
    twice the Sunday following, being most kindly and cordially
    entertained by Mr. and Mrs. Richard's for nine days, during which
    time Elder Kimball baptized several in the neighborhood.

    After a short visit to Preston, where Elder Hyde continued to
    preach and baptize, Elder Kimball returned to Walker-fold, and
    continued to receive the hospitality of Mr. Richards' house for
    some days, while the work spread in the neighborhood; and from
    thence the work went forth to Clitheroe, Waddington, Downham,
    Cathburn, Thornley, and Ribchester, through the labors of Brothers
    Kimball and Fielding.

    Elders Goodson and Richards arrived in Bedford on the 2nd of
    August, and having letters of introduction to the Rev. Timothy R.
    Matthews from Brother Joseph Fielding (Mrs. Matthew's brother),
    they immediately waited on Mr. Matthews, who expressed great joy at
    their arrival, and manifested his sincerity by walking arm in arm
    with the {317} Elders through the streets of Bedford, calling on
    the members of his church, and inviting them to attend the lectures
    of the Elders at his chapel vestry that evening. Mr. Matthews
    had previously been apprized of the Saints in America through
    the medium of the Rev. James Fielding of Preston and the letters
    from America, before referred to. In the evening, his church
    assembled in the vestry, and Elders Goodson and Richards continued
    to lecture and testify of the work of God, on that and the three
    following evenings in the same place, with the entire approbation
    of Mr. Matthews, who, at the close of the lectures, publicly bore
    testimony to the truths advanced, and called upon his people to
    know why they did not come forward for baptism; while they in
    return wished to know why he did not set them the example.

    After this Mr. Matthews engaged another house in the neighborhood
    for the Elders to preach in, under the pretense that some of the
    proprietors of the chapel might not be pleased with the Elders
    occupying the vestry, and Mr. Matthews continued to attend the
    preaching of the Elders, and also spent a great share of his time,
    from day to day, in conversation with them.

    Mr. Matthews told the Elders that he had received two ordinations,
    one from Bishop West, whom he had proved to be an impostor, and
    another from the Church of England, which he acknowledged to be
    descended from the Church of Rome, and he further acknowledged that
    he had no authority from God for administering in the ordinances of
    God's house.

    On the 10th Mrs. Braddock and four others were baptized by Elder
    Goodson. Soon after this, Mr. Joseph Saville, member of Mr.
    Matthews' church, being very desirous of receiving baptism at the
    same time with Mr. Matthews, waited on him at his house, in company
    with Elders Goodson and Richards and Mr. Matthews, and Mr. Saville
    mutually agreed to meet the Elders on the bank of the river Ouse
    at a specified hour in the afternoon, and attend to the ordinance
    of baptism. At the hour appointed Mr. Saville met the Elders at
    the place previously designated by Mr. Matthews; but as he (the
    latter) did not make his appearance according to promise, after
    waiting for him an hour, Mr. Saville was baptized, when the Elders
    repaired to Mr. Matthews' to learn the cause of his not fulfilling
    his engagement, and were informed by Mr. Matthews' family that he
    had gone out into the country to preach.

    In a day or two it was currently rumored that Mr. Matthews had
    baptized himself, and this rumor was afterwards confirmed by
    Mrs. Matthews, who stated to Elder Kimball at Preston, that Mr.
    Matthews had baptized himself, reasoning upon this principle within
    himself: "If I {318} have authority to administer the sacrament
    to my people, why not have authority to baptize myself," &c.--and
    all this after Mr. Matthews had acknowledged to Elders Goodson and
    Richards that he had no authority to administer in the ordinances
    of God's house; and altogether regardless of the words of the
    Apostles (Heb. v: 4), "No man taketh this honor unto himself but he
    that is called of God as was Aaron."

    By the foregoing it is plainly to be seen, that Mr. Matthews has
    attempted to take that upon himself which was never conferred upon
    him by the spirit of revelation, either by God, His angels, or His
    servants; viz., the holy Priesthood; and from that period, Mr.
    Matthews began to preach baptism, and baptized those who felt it
    their duty to be baptized, and then invited them to the penitent
    form to get remission of their sins; but finding that would not
    answer all the design which he intended, he afterwards began to
    baptize for the remission of sins.

    Mr. Matthews appears to have well understood that counterfeit
    coin is more current the nearer it approximates to the true, and
    governed himself accordingly; for he continued to preach faith,
    repentance, baptism for the remission of sins, the second coming
    of Christ, &c., &c., adding one thing to another in imitation of
    truth, as fast as it answered his purpose, from those doctrines
    which he had heard from the Latter-day Saints; but it was some
    time before he arrived at that heaven-daring conscience-seared
    hardihood, to lay hands on those whom he had baptized for the
    reception of the Holy Ghost, and at the same time he acknowledged
    that he had not got the Holy Ghost himself, by praying that he
    might receive it--(Query. How can a man communicate that which he
    is not in possession of?) and he now calls his church "The Church
    of Latter-day Saints."

    Thus has Mr. Matthews been running about from Bedford to Liverpool,
    from Liverpool to Northampton, from Northampton to Bedford,
    and other places, crying aloud in public and private, that the
    Latter-day Saints and their doctrines came from hell; at the same
    time he has been preaching the same doctrines, calls his church by
    the same name, is administering in the same ordinances, just as
    though he fully believed that the doctrines and sacraments of hell
    would be sanctified and made holy and heavenly, when administered
    by the tongue and hands of an impostor.

    About the time that Mr. Matthews rejected the truth in Bedford, his
    son (as Mr. Matthews called him), the Rev. Robert Aitkin, commenced
    his attack on the principles of righteousness in Preston; and while
    furiously pounding his pulpit with the Book of Mormon, and warning
    his people to beware of the Latter-day Saints and their doctrines,
    saying, that they and their record came from hell; called upon his
    people to use all their efforts to put down the work of God, or
    stop the progress of the {319} Latter-day Saints; and, if it could
    not be put down without, prayed that God would smite the leaders;
    and from that time to the present, his prayer has been answered on
    his own head.

    After Mr. Aitkin had preached against the corruptions of the Church
    of England for years, and established many flourishing chapels in
    Liverpool, Preston, Manchester, Burslem, London, &c.; after he had
    been visited by the Elders of the Church of Latter-day Saints,
    and acknowledged to them at one time that baptism was right, but
    he could find no man who had authority to baptize; and at another
    time, that he was afraid of them, and rejected their testimony; and
    last of all would not receive the Elders into his house; after all
    this, and deserted by a part of his flock, he has fled from the
    remainder because he was an hireling, and cared not for the sheep;
    yes, he has deserted his "Christian Society"--ceased to be an
    Aitkenite, and dissolved his co-partnership with Father Matthews,
    as may well be supposed, returned, and, taken "holy order" in
    "Mother Church," against the corruptions of which he testified so
    diligently from year to year, and is now about to enter on his
    parochial duties in St. John the Evangelist's Church, Hope street,
    Liverpool, for no other reason, that the writer knows of, only that
    he could find no one who had authority to baptize for the remission
    of sins, and not possessing the faith of his father, Matthews, to
    believe that the doctrines of the pit would become holy and gospel
    doctrines when taught by the tongue of wickedness and imposture,
    he has concluded thus publicly to acknowledge himself a servant of
    those very errors he has so long contended against, for the sake of
    filthy lucre.

    About the 12th of September, Elder Goodson and Priest Snider
    returned to Preston, and soon after sailed for America.

    Some years previously, the principles of the Temperance Society
    (originally established in America), were introduced into England,
    and Preston was the first town to receive them. Among the many
    interesting and valuable items held forth by the Temperance people,
    it was often remarked by them that Temperance was the fore-runner
    of the Gospel, which prophecy proved true; for when the fullness
    of the Gospel came from America to England, it was first preached
    in Preston, and through the influence of the Temperance Society,
    the Latter-day Saint, procured the use of the Temperance Hall
    in Preston (a commodious building, originally erected for cock
    fighting) for their chapel, and commenced meeting therein on the
    3rd of September, 1837, and continued until they were ejected
    through the influence of others, the Temperance Society not having
    it entirely at their control. Similar favors have been received
    from several other Temperance Societies in England, for which the
    Lord reward them.

    Elder Richards continued to labor against much opposition in {320}
    Bedford, and the region round about, until the 7th of March, 1838,
    when he returned to Preston, leaving about forty members in charge
    of Elder James Lavender. Elder Russell continued to labor in
    Alston, Brampton, &c, and returned to Preston near the same time,
    leaving about sixty member in the care of Elder Jacob Peart.

    At Christmas, 1837, Priest Joseph Fielding was ordained Elder, and
    several were ordained Teachers, &c., at Preston; and in March,
    1838, the Church had extended from Preston to Penwortham, Longton,
    Southport, Eccleston Whittle, Hunter's Hill, Chorley, and the
    intermediate region, through the labors of Elders Hyde, Kimball,
    and Fielding, and the members amounted to several hundreds in the
    regions of Preston and Clitheroe. During this month, Elders Kimball
    and Hyde were diligently engaged in organizing the different
    branches; and on the first of April a general conference was called
    at Preston, when the organization of the churches was completed,
    and many were ordained, among whom were Elders Joseph Fielding,
    Willard Richards, and William Clayton to the High Priesthood, [_i.
    e_. they were ordained High Priests], and set apart by Elders
    Kimball and Hyde to preside over all the churches in England.

    On the 9th, Elders Kimball, Hyde and Russell took leave of the
    Saints in Preston, and went to Liverpool, where they were visited
    by Elders Fielding, Richards, Clayton, and others, and on the 20th
    of April, sailed for New York, on board the _Garrick_, the same
    ship they came out on to England.

    When Elders Fielding and Richards had returned to Longton, they
    found a pamphlet, purporting to be written by the Rev. Richard
    Livesey, a Methodist minister, who had spent some time on a mission
    to the United States, as he says, and having nothing more important
    to attend to during his mission, it appears that he spent his
    time in gathering up a heap of lies and filth from the American
    papers, and imported them to England on his return; and finding
    that the work of God had commenced in his native land, and was
    likely to destroy his craft, set himself at work to condense his
    heterogeneous mass of trans-Atlantic lies, and form the wonderful
    production of the Rev. Richard Livesey's tract against the
    Latter-day Saints; it being the first thing of the kind that the
    enemy of all righteousness had found means to export from America,
    and circulate in England; but since which he has found servants in
    abundance, to assist in this nefarious merchandise of his heart's
    delight.

    The Church at this time was in its infancy, and needed much
    instruction, which necessarily occupied the attention of the
    presiding Elders to a great extent; and as there were few laborers
    in the field, the spread of the work was not very rapid for some
    time.

    {321} Sister Alice Hodgin died at Preston on the 2nd of September,
    1838; and it was such a wonderful thing for a Latter-day Saint
    to die in England, that Elder Richards was arraigned before the
    Mayor's Court at Preston, on the 3rd of October, charged with
    "killing and slaying" the said Alice with a "black stick," &c., but
    was discharged without being permitted to make his defense, as soon
    as it was discovered that the iniquity of his accusers was about to
    be made manifest.

    October 19, 1838, Elder Clayton gave himself wholly to the work,
    and soon after commenced preaching and baptizing in Manchester, and
    from thence the work spread into Stockport, and other places in
    the neighborhood, through the labors of Elders Clayton, Fielding,
    John Moon, and David Wilding. A small church had previously sprung
    up in Bolton, through the labors of Elder David Wilding, and was
    continued by Elder Amos Fielding.

    In the summer of 1839 Elders Clayton Richards, and John Moon,
    labored in Burslem, with some success, and a small church was
    planted in Burnley by Elder Thomas Richardson, besides many who
    were added in the older branches, through the instrumentality of
    the local Elders and Priests, who were generally very faithful.

    December 8, 1839, Elders Hiram Clark, Alexander Wright, and Samuel
    Mulliner arrived in Preston from America; and on the 25th, Brothers
    Wright and Mulliner started for Scotland and soon commenced
    preaching and baptizing in Paisley and vicinity.

    January 13, 1840, Elders Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, and
    Theodore Turley arrived in Preston, from America; and on the
    18th Brothers Woodruff and Turley started for the Potteries in
    Staffordshire, passing through Manchester; and on the 22nd, Elder
    Taylor left for Liverpool.

    April 6, 1840, just ten years from the organization of the Church,
    Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson
    Pratt, George A. Smith, and Reuben Hedlock, landed in Liverpool
    from New York; and on the 9th Elder Kimball arrived in Preston,
    just two years from the day he left for America.

    The arrival of the Elders caused the Saints to rejoice exceedingly,
    for it had been prophesied by many (not of the Church), that they
    would never come, and that Elders Kimball and Hyde would never
    return, but they are both now in England, Elder Orson Hyde having
    arrived in Liverpool on the 3rd instant from New York.

    Heber C. Kimball,

    Orson Hyde,

    Willard Richards.

    Preston, March 24, 1841.

{322}



Chapter XVII.

Celebration of the Twelfth Anniversary of the Organization of the
Church--Order of Laying Corner-Stones of Temples--Council Meetings of
the Twelve in England.

_March, 25, 26 and 27, 1841_.--Elders Young and Richards were detained
at the Liverpool post office, as witnesses in the case of "The Queen
vs. Joseph Holloway," for detaining letters.

_Saturday, 27_.--Elders Wilford Woodruff, and Geo. A. Smith attended
a council of the official members of the Staffordshire Conference, at
Hanley.

[Sidenote: Staffordshire Conference.]

_Sunday, 28_.--Elders Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith attended
a general meeting of the Staffordshire Conference at Hanley, when 13
branches were represented, containing 1 High Priest, 17 Elders, 55
Priests, 25 Teachers, 14 Deacons, and 663 members. Thomas J. Filcher,
J. Taylor, Osmond Shaw, W. Ridge, and H. Ridge were ordained Elders,
also 8 Priests, 7 Teachers, and 2 Deacons, under the hands of Wilford
Woodruff, Geo. A. Smith, and Alfred Cordon. There have been 141
baptized during the past three months.

[Sidenote: Union of Commerce and Nauvoo Plats.]

_Monday, 29_.--I attended city council, and moved that the city
surveyor be ordered to survey Commerce, and plat the same so as to
correspond with the city plat of Nauvoo, and make out a map to be
recorded, which was carried by the Council. Much was said in council
about fining the owners of dogs, and I contended that it was right to
fine individuals {323} who would keep unruly dogs, to worry cattle,
sheep, or the citizens, and an ordinance was passed to that effect.

William Marks, president of the stake at Nauvoo, made choice of Charles
C. Rich and Austin Cowles as his counselors.

Elders Young and Richards were at Liverpool packing Books of Mormon, to
pay off those who had loaned them money in order to carry forward the
printing and binding.

The following are extracts from Elder Woodruff's letter.

    _Letter of Wilford Woodruff to Don C. Smith--Relating to Affairs in
    England_.

    Burslem, March 29, 1841.

    Brother Don Carlos Smith:--The following is a brief sketch of my
    journey from London to this place. Elder Kimball left London on
    the 19th February. I left on the 26th, and arrived at Bristol on
    the same day, where I found Elder Kington, who was busily engaged
    in the work of the Lord in that city, and had established a small
    branch of fourteen members. I tarried there a short time and
    preached three times in a theatre, had large congregations, good
    attention, and baptized one, and there appears a good prospect of
    a work being done in that city. Population of Bristol, 200,000.
    While there I visited the suspension bridge, now erecting across
    the river Avon, at St. Vincent's Rocks, Clifton; which bridge is
    one hundred feet in height above the river, and seven hundred in
    length. I spent one evening in Monmouth, on the borders of Wales;
    preached to a large congregation; several applied for baptism
    after meeting. On the 8th of March I attended a conference in
    Garway; Elder Levi Richards was chosen president, and James Morgan,
    clerk; heard four branches represented, containing one hundred
    and thirty-four members; three were ordained to the ministry. I
    also preached at Lugwardine, Shucknall Hill, Ledbury, Dymock, and
    Turkey Hall to large congregations, and find the work of the Lord
    still progressing throughout that region. The excitement upon the
    subject in the city of Hereford has been so great, that it has
    assembled together in the market place three thousand persons at
    a time to hear something upon the cause of the Latter-day Saints.
    On the 15th of March I attended the Gadfield Elm conference, which
    met at the Gadfield Elm Chapel. Elder Wilford Woodruff was chosen
    president; John Hill, clerk; 18 branches represented, containing
    408 members, 8 Elders, 32 Priests, 11 Teachers {324} and 1 Deacon;
    when such business was transacted as was deemed necessary. I also
    met large congregations at Keysend Street, Coldville, Browcut;
    Dunclose, Froom's Hill, and Stanley Hill, and left many churches
    on the right and left, which time would not permit me to visit.
    I also met with the Froom's Hill conference, on the 22nd March,
    at Stanley Hill, Herefordshire, there being present one of the
    traveling High Council, 2 High Priests, 20 Elders, 30 Priests, 9
    Teachers, two Deacons. Elder Levi Richards was chosen president,
    and Elder Woodruff, clerk. On this occasion I heard represented
    30 branches, containing 997 members, 24 Elders, 66 Priests, 27
    Teachers, 7 Deacons, and 6 were ordained to the ministry. The
    sum total represented at these conferences was 1,539 members, 36
    Elders, 103 Priests, 41 Teachers, 7 Deacons; all of whom have
    embraced the work in that part of the vineyard in one year, besides
    many members and officers who have emigrated to America; and I am
    happy to say that the officers and members, have universally been
    ready to hearken to counsel, and give heed to our instructions, and
    it was with no ordinary feelings that I took my farewell of those
    churches who have been so ready to receive and embrace the truth. I
    called upon the Saints in Birmingham and Gret's Green, but had not
    time to hold any meetings among them. I arrived in Hanley on the
    25th, where I had the privilege of again meeting with Elder Geo. A.
    Smith, and was rejoiced to find the churches universally prospering
    in Staffordshire. I spent one evening with the church at Longton,
    and baptized seven.

_Tuesday, 30_.--Elders Woodruff and Geo. A. Smith arrived in
Manchester, after a ride of forty miles.

_Wednesday, 31_.--Elders Young and Richards attended conference in
Liverpool.

_Thursday, April 1, 1841_.--Elders Young and Richards went to
Manchester, where they found Elders Kimball, Hyde, Woodruff and Smith,
and had a happy meeting.

_Friday, 2_.--Elders Orson Pratt and John Taylor arrived at Manchester
and went into council.

    _Minutes of a Council Meeting of the Twelve_.

    Manchester, England, April 2, 1841.

    This day Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, Parley
    P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Willard Richards, Wilford Woodruff, John
    Taylor and Geo. A. Smith, of the quorum of the Twelve, met together
    at the house of Brother James Bushaw, coachman No. 4, Gray Street,
    near Oxford road, in this city, in council, after having been {325}
    separated and sent into various counties. To meet once more in
    council after a long separation, and having passed through many
    sore and grievous trials, exposing our lives and our characters
    to the slanders and violence of wicked and murderous men, caused
    our hearts to swell with gratitude to God for His providential
    care over us. Elder Young opened the council by prayer. Elders
    Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Parley P. Pratt, the committee
    appointed about a year ago to secure a copyright for the Book of
    Mormon, in the name of Joseph Smith, Jun., presented the following
    certificate:

    "Feb. 8, 1841. Then entered for his copy--the property of Joseph
    Smith, Jun.,--'The Book of Mormon; an account written by the hand
    of Mormon, upon plates taken from the plates of Nephi; translated
    by Joseph Smith, Jun. First European, from the second American
    edition. Received five copies.

    "George Greenhill."

    "The above is a true copy of an entry in the register book of
    the Company of Stationers kept, at the hall of the said company.
    Witness my hand, this 17th day of February, 1841.

    "George Greenhill,

    Warehouse-keeper of the Company of Stationers."

    The quorum voted that they accepted the labors of said Committee.

    _Resolved_: That as the quorum of the Twelve have had nothing to
    do with the printing of the Book of Mormon, they will not now
    interfere with it, but that the said Committee settle the financial
    or business matters thereof with Joseph Smith, Jun., to whom the
    profits rightly belong.

    _Resolved_: That Elder Amos Fielding be appointed to superintend
    fitting out the Saints from Liverpool to America, under the
    instruction of Parley P. Pratt.

    _Resolved_: That Brother Geo. J. Adams go to Bedford and
    Northampton and labor in that region.

    Adjourned till tomorrow at 10 o'clock, a. m.; Elder Kimball closed
    by prayer.

    Orson Hyde, Clerk.

    _Council Meeting of the Twelve--Continued_.

    Manchester, April 3, 1841.

    This day the quorum of the Twelve met pursuant to adjournment. The
    president called upon Elder Hyde to open by prayer. The quorum then
    signed a letter of commendation to the churches in England for
    Elder Hyde.

    The business of publishing the _Star_ and hymn-book was then taken
    into consideration. Brother John Taylor moved that those who have
    had the care and superintendence of publishing the _Star_ and
    hymn-book, {326} should dispose of them according to their own
    wishes, and dispose of the proceeds in the same way; seconded by
    Elder Orson Pratt, and carried by unanimous vote. Moved by Elder
    Young, and seconded by Elder Kimball, that Elder Parley P. Pratt
    conduct the publication of the _Millennial Star_ as editor of the
    same, after the close of the present volume. _Resolved_, that Elder
    Parley P. Pratt reprint the hymn-book if he deem it expedient.
    The hymn-book is not to be altered, except the typographical
    errors. The above resolution was moved by Elder Geo. A. Smith, and
    seconded by Elder Wilford Woodruff; carried unanimously. Conference
    adjourned.

    Orson Hyde, Clerk.

_Sunday, 4_.--The President of the United States, William Henry
Harrison died at Washington of the pleurisy.

Nine of the Twelve at Manchester attended meeting at Carpenter's hall,
and individually bore testimony of the fulness of the everlasting
Gospel.

    _Council Meeting of the Twelve--Continued_.

    Manchester, April 5, 1841.

    Met pursuant to adjournment. Elder Orson Pratt opened the council
    by prayer. It was resolved that the 17th day of April be the day
    appointed for the Twelve who are going to America, to set sail from
    Liverpool. Moved by Elder Kimball and seconded by Elder Woodruff
    that the Twelve do business at the conference as a quorum, and call
    upon the Church or conference to sanction it. Adjourned till the
    6th instant, to meet in general conference at Carpenter's Hall, at
    10 o'clock a. m.

    O. Hyde, Clerk.

[Sidenote: Twelfth Anniversary of the Organization of the Church.]

_April 6, 1841_.--The first day of the twelfth year of the Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints! At an early hour the several
companies comprising the "Nauvoo Legion," with two volunteer companies
from Iowa Territory, making sixteen companies in all, assembled at
their several places of rendezvous, and were conducted in due order
to the ground assigned for general review. The appearance, order and
movements of the Legion, were chaste, grand and imposing, and reflected
great credit upon the taste, skill and tact of the men comprising said
Legion. We doubt whether the like can be presented in {327} any other
city in the western country. At half-past seven o'clock a. m., the
fire of artillery announced the arrival of Brigadier-Generals Law and
Don Carlos Smith, at the front of their respective cohorts; and at 8
o'clock Major-General Bennett was conducted to his post, under the
discharge of cannon, and took command of the Legion.

At half-past nine o'clock a. m., Lieutenant-General Smith, with his
guard, staff and field officers arrived at the ground, and were
presented with a beautiful silk national flag by the ladies of Nauvoo,
which was respectfully received and hailed by the firing of cannon, and
borne off by Colonel Robinson, the cornet, to the appropriate position
in the line; after which the Lieutenant-General with his suite passed
the lines in review.

At twelve m., the procession arrived upon the Temple ground,
enclosing the same in a hollow square, with Lieutenant-General
Smith, Major-General Bennett, Brigadier-Generals Wilson Law and
Don Carlos Smith, their respective staffs, guard, field officers,
distinguished visitors, choir, band, &c., in the centre, and the ladies
and gentlemen, citizens, surrounding in the interior. The superior
officers, together with the banner, architects, principal speaker, &c.,
were duly conducted to the stand at the principal corner stone, and the
religious services were commenced by singing from page 65 of the new
hymn book.

[Sidenote: Sidney Rigdon's Speech.]

President Sidney Rigdon then addressed the assembly, and remarked the
circumstances under which he addressed the people were of no ordinary
character, but of peculiar and indescribable interest, that it was the
third occasion of a similar nature, wherein he had been called upon
to address the people, and to assist in laying the corner stones of
houses to be erected in honor of the God of the Saints. Various scenes
had transpired since the first was laid--he with some who were with
him on that occasion, had waded through scenes that no other people
had ever seen--not cursed, but blessed {328} with. They had seen the
blood of the innocent flow, and heard the groans of those dying for the
witness of Jesus; in all those scenes of tribulation, his confidence,
his courage and his joy had been increasing instead of diminishing.
Now the scene had changed; persecution had in a measure subsided;
peace and safety, friendship and joy crowned their assembling; and
their endeavors to serve God were respected and viewed with interest.
The Saints had assembled, not to violate law and trample upon equity
and good social order; not to devastate and destroy; but to lift up
the standard of liberty and law, to stand in defense of civil and
religious, rights, to protect the innocent, to save mankind, and
to obey the will and mandate of the Lord of glory; to call up to
remembrance the once crucified, but now exalted and glorified Savior;
to say that He is again revealed, that He speaks from the heavens,
that He reigns; in honor of Him to tell the world that He lives, and
speaks, and reigns and dictates--that not every people can build a
house to Him, but that people whom He Himself directs--that the present
military display is not to usurp authority, but to obey as they are
commanded and directed; to honor, not the world, but Him that is alive
and reigns, the all in all, the invisible, but beholding, and guiding
and directing--that the Saints boast of their King; of His wisdom, His
understanding, His power and His goodness--that they honor a God of
unbounded power and glory--that He is the chief corner stone in Zion,
also the top stone--that He cannot be conquered--that He is working
in the world to guide, to conquer, and to subdue--that as formerly,
so now He works by revelation--that this is the reason why we are
here, and why we are thus--that the Saints have sacrificed all things
for the testimony of Jesus Christ--that some from different parts of
Europe and from Canada, as well as the different parts of the United
States, are present, and among all, a unanimity of purpose and feeling
prevails--and why? Because the same God over all had spoken {329} from
the heavens and again revealed Himself. He remarked that he defied
the devil to collect such an assembly; none but Jesus would or could
accomplish such things as we are about to behold; the devil will not
build up, but tear down and destroy; the work of Jesus is like Himself
in all ages--that as light shines from the east, and spreads itself
to the west, so is the progress of spiritual light and truth--that
Jesus is a God of order, regularity and uniformity--that he works now
by revelation and by messengers as anciently--shows Himself--lifts
the veil; that such things are marvelous, but nevertheless true--that
the order of laying the corner stones was expressive of the order of
the kingdom--that the minutia were subject matter of revelation, and
all the scenery, acts of obedience are understood by the Saints--that
the ancient Prophets beheld and rejoiced at this scene, and are near
to witness the fulfillment of their predictions--that we are highly
favored of God, and brought near to the spirits of just men made
perfect. He then closed by exhortation, first to the multitude, and
lastly to the Church. The speaker then gave out a hymn, page 205, and
closed by prayer.

The architects then, by the direction of the First Presidency, lowered
the first (the south-east corner) stone to its place, and President
Joseph Smith pronounced the benediction as follows:

    This principal corner stone in representation of the First
    Presidency, is now duly laid in honor of the Great God; and may
    it there remain until the whole fabric is completed; and may the
    same be accomplished speedily; that the Saints may have a place to
    worship God, and the Son of Man have where to lay His head.

President Sidney Rigdon then pronounced the following:

    May the persons employed in the erection of this house be preserved
    from all harm while engaged in its construction, till the whole is
    completed, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
    Holy Ghost. Even so. Amen.

Adjourned for one hour.

{330} Assembled according to adjournment, and proceeded to lay the
remaining corner stones, according to previous order.

The second (south-west corner) stone, by the direction of the president
of the High Priesthood, with his council and President Marks, was
lowered to its place, when the president of the High Priesthood
pronounced the following:

    The second corner stone of the Temple now building by the Church
    of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, in honor of the Great God,
    is duly laid, and may the same unanimity, that has been manifested
    on this occasion continue till the whole is completed; that peace
    may rest upon it to the laying of the top stone thereof, and the
    turning of the key thereof; that the Saints may participate in the
    blessings of Israel's God, within its walls, and the glory of God
    rest upon the same. Amen.

The third (the north-west corner) stone, superintended by the High
Council, was then lowered to its place, with the benediction of Elias
Higbee, as follows:

    The third corner stone is now duly laid; may this stone be a firm
    support to the building that the whole may be completed as before
    proposed.

The fourth (the north-east corner) stone, superintended by the Bishops,
was then lowered to its place, and Bishop Whitney pronounced the
following:

    The fourth and last corner stone, expressive of the Lesser
    Priesthood, is now duly laid, and may the blessings before
    pronounced, with all others desirable, rest upon the same forever.
    Amen.

The services were then declared closed, and the military retired to the
parade ground and were dismissed with the approbation and thanks of the
commanding officer. The military band, under the command of Captain
Duzette, made a conspicuous and dignified appearance, and performed
their part honorably. Their soul-stirring strains met harmoniously the
rising emotions that swelled each bosom, and stimulated us onward to
the arduous but pleasing and honorable duties of the day. The choir
also, under the direction of B. S. Wilber, deserve commendation.

[Sidenote: Conduct of the People.]

What added greatly to the happiness we experienced on this interesting
occasion, is the fact that we heard no {331} obscene or profane
language; neither saw we any one intoxicated. Can the same be said of
a similar assemblage in any other city in the Union? Thank God that
the intoxicating beverage, the bane of humanity in these last days, is
becoming a stranger in Nauvoo.

In conclusion, we will say we never witnessed a more imposing spectacle
than was presented on this occasion, and during the sessions of
the conference. Such a multitude of people moving in harmony, in
friendship, in dignity, told in a voice not easily misunderstood, that
they were a people of intelligence, and virtue and order; in short,
that they were _Saints_; and that the God of love, purity and light,
was their God, their Examplar, and Director; and that they were blessed
and happy.

[Sidenote: Order of Laying Corner Stones of Temples.]

If the strict order of the Priesthood were carried out in the building
of Temples, the first stone would be laid at the south-east corner, by
the First Presidency of the Church. The south-west corner should be
laid next. The third, or north-west corner next; and the fourth, or
north-east corner last. The first Presidency should lay the south-east
corner stone and dictate who are the proper persons to lay the other
corner stones.

If a Temple is built at a distance, and the First Presidency are not
present, then the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles are the persons to
dictate the order for that Temple; and in the absence of the Twelve
Apostles, then the Presidency of the Stake will lay the south-east
corner stone; the Melchisedec Priesthood laying the corner stones on
the east side of the Temple, and the Lesser Priesthood those on the
west side.

[Sidenote: Conference at Philadelphia.]

A Conference was held at Philadelphia; President Hyrum Smith presiding;
many branches were represented and the branch at Philadelphia was
organized by electing Benjamin Winchester, President, and Edson
Whipple, and William Wharnot, his Counselors. Jacob Syphret was elected
Bishop, and Jesse Prince and James Nicholson his Counselors.

    {332} _Meeting of the Council of the Twelve in Manchester_.

    The Council of the Twelve assembled at Manchester, in Carpenter's
    Hall, on the 7th day of April, 1841, for the first time to transact
    business as a quorum in the presence of the Church, in a foreign
    land; being the first day of the 12th year of the rise of the
    Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Nine of the quorum
    were present; viz., Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde,
    Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, Willard Richards,
    John Taylor and Geo. A. Smith, President Young having called the
    meeting to order, and organized, the conference then opened by
    prayer. Elder Thomas Ward was chosen Clerk. The President then
    made some introductory remarks relative to the organization of the
    Church in the House of the Lord in America, in reference to the
    different quorums in their respective orders and authorities in the
    Church.

    The representation of the churches and conferences throughout the
    kingdom was then called for.

     Location.                    By Whom Represented   Members. Elders. Priests. Teachers. Deacons.
     Manchester                   Parley P. Pratt       443      7       15       9         0
     Clitheroe Conference         Heber C. Kimball      318      6       12       13        3
     Presten Conference           Peter Melling         675      11      15       13        3
     Liverpool                    John Taylor           190      9       8        4         3
     Isle of Man                  John Taylor           90       2       4        2         0
     London Conference            Lorenzo Snow          137      3       8        4         2
     Birmingham Conference        Alfred Cordon         110      4       13       4         1
     Staffordshire Conference     Alfred Cordon         574      19      49       28        16
     Garway Conference            Wilford Woodruff      134      5       6        4         1
     Gadfield Elm Conference      Wilford Woodruff      408      8       33       11        1
     Froom's Hill Conference      Wilford Woodruff      1008     27      67       27        8
     Edingburgh                   Orson Pratt           203      6       9        6         2
     Glasgow, Paisley, Johnstone, Reuben Hedlock        368      12      15       13        11
     Bridge of Weir, and
     Thorney Bank
     Ireland                      Theodore Curtis       35       2       0        1         0
     Wales                        James Burnham         170      2       5        3         3
     Newcastle-upon-Tyne          Amos Fielding         23       1       3        1         0
     Alston                       John Sanders          26       1       0        1         0
     Brampton                     John Sanders          46       0       1        0         0
     Carlisle                     John Sanders          43       1       0        0         0
     Bolton                       Robert Crooks         189      1       11       8         1
     Dukinfield                   John Albertson        120      2       4        3         2
     Northwich, Middlewich, &c    Samuel Heath          112      2       6        6         6
     Oldham                       William Black         86       1       4        1         2
     Stockport                    Elder Magan           161      1       5        2         2
     Eccles                       Elder Magan           24       1       3        1         0
     Pendlebury                   Elder Magan           62       0       2        1         1
     Whitefield                   Elder Magan           41       1       2        3         0
     Radcliffe Bridge             Elder Magan           18       1       3        0         0
                                  Total                 5814     136     304      169       68

    Nearly eight hundred Saints have emigrated to America during the
    past season. These are not included in this representation.

    {333} Conference adjourned till 2 p. m.

    Conference met pursuant to adjournment; opened by prayer.

    Scattering members were then represented, consisting of nearly
    fifty, not included in any of the above branches.

    President Young then proceeded to make some remarks on the office
    of Patriarch, and concluded by moving that Elder John Albertson [1]
    be ordained to that office. Seconded by Elder Kimball, and carried
    unanimously.

    _Resolved_: That George D. Watt, George J. Adams, Amos Fielding,
    William Kay, John Sanders, Thomas Richardson, James Whitehead,
    Thomas Domville, James Galley and George Simpson be ordained High
    Priests.

    _Resolved_: That the following persons be ordained Elders--William
    Miller, William Leach, John Sands, William Moon, William Hardman,
    William Black, John Goodfellow, Joseph Brotherton, Richard Benson,
    Theophilus Brotherton, John McIlwick, and William Green.

    _Resolved_: That Manchester, Stockport, Dukinfield, Oldham, Bolton,
    and all the neighboring branches be organized into one conference,
    to be called the Manchester Conference.

    That the Church in Brampton, Alston, and Carlisle be included in
    one conference.

    That the churches of Liverpool, Isles of Man, Wales, viz., Overton,
    Harding and Ellsmere, be organized into one conference, to be
    called the Liverpool conference.

    _Resolved_: That the Macclesfield Conference include Macclesfield,
    Northwich, Middlewich, and Lostock.

    That Edinburgh Conference include Glasgow, Paisley, Bridge of Weir,
    Johnstone and Thorney Bank.

    That George D. Watt preside over the Edinburgh Conference.

    That John Greenhow preside over the Liverpool Conference.

    That Thomas Ward preside over the Clitheroe Conference.

    That Lorenzo Snow preside over the London Conference.

    That James Galley preside over the Macclesfield Conference.

    That Alfred Cordon preside over the Staffordshire Conference.

    That James Riley be ordained a High Priest, and preside over the
    Birmingham Conference.

    That James McAnley preside over the Glasgow Conference.

    That Thomas Richardson preside over the Gadfield Elm Conference.

    That William Kay preside over the Froom's Hill Conference.

    That Levi Richards have the superintendence of the Garway
    Conference.

    {334} That Peter Melling preside over the Preston Conference.

    That John Sanders preside over the Brampton Conference.

    Adjourned till seven o'clock, p. m.

    Met pursuant to adjournment; commenced by singing, "When shall we
    all meet again," and prayer.

    The Patriarch Peter Melling, was then called upon to pronounce a
    patriarchal blessing upon the head of John Albertson, previous to
    his being ordained to the office of Patriarch. Laying his hands
    upon him he blessed him in the following words:

    "John, I lay my hands upon thy head, in the name of Jesus Christ;
    and by the authority of the Holy Priesthood committed unto me, I
    pronounce upon thy head the blessings of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob;
    and I say unto thee, that, inasmuch as it is in thy heart to do
    the will of the Lord, thou shalt be blessed, and the desires of
    thy heart shall be granted thee; and the Lord God will enlarge thy
    heart; and, inasmuch as thou wilt be humble and faithful before
    the Lord in thy calling, even that of a Patriarch, thou shalt be
    blessed, strengthened, and have great wisdom and understanding;
    thy bowels shall be filled with compassion for the widow and
    fatherless; and I pray that our Father in Heaven will take thee
    into His own care, and as He feels for thy welfare, thou shalt
    be made strong in faith, and the Lord shall bless thee and open
    thy understanding. Thou shalt know the doctrine of Jesus Christ,
    and the mysteries of heaven shall be opened to thy mind. Thou
    shalt also have the gift of prophecy and revelation, and thou
    shalt predict those things that shall take place to the latest
    generation. I pray that our Father in heaven may confer these
    blessings upon thy head; yea, thou shalt be a mighty man, if thou
    wilt be a faithful man, and a humble man, so that thou mayst be an
    ornament to thy calling, and a blessing to thy posterity; yea, thy
    posterity shall be blessed, and they shall become mighty upon the
    earth, and become blessed inasmuch as thou wilt be faithful in all
    things, and watch unto prayer. Thou shalt finally overcome, and
    be lifted up on high, and inherit the mansions prepared for thee
    in the kingdom of our God. Thou art of the blood of Ephraim; and
    I seal these blessings upon thy head in the name of Jesus Christ.
    Amen, and amen."

    The Apostles then laid hands on John Albertson, and ordained him to
    the office of Patriarch.

    The ordinations of the High Priests then took place; but, from the
    pressure of business, it was directed that the High Priests who
    were present should retire to the vestry, with those who were to be
    ordained Elders, and there ordain them at the same time that the
    ordinations of the High Priests were proceeding.

    Several appropriate discourses were delivered by different
    members {335} of the Twelve Apostles in relation to the duties
    of the officers in their respective callings, and the duties and
    privileges of the members; also of the prosperity of the work in
    general.

    A very richly ornamented cake, a present from New York, from
    Elder George J. Adams' wife to the Twelve, was then exhibited to
    the meeting. This was blessed by them and distributed to all the
    officers and members, and the whole congregation, consisting,
    perhaps, of seven hundred people; a large fragment was still
    preserved for some who were not present. During the distribution
    several appropriate hymns were sung, and a powerful and general
    feeling of delight universally pervaded the meeting.

    While this was proceeding, Elder Parley P. Pratt composed, and
    handed over to the clerk, the following lines, which the clerk then
    read to the meeting:

  When in far distant regions,
  As strangers we roam,
  Far away from our country,
  Our friends and our home:

  When sinking in sorrow,
  Fresh courage we'll take,
  As we think of our friends,
  And remember the _cake_.

    Elder Orson Hyde appealed powerfully to the meeting, and covenanted
    with the Saints present, in a bond of mutual prayer, during his
    mission to Jerusalem and the East, which was sustained on the part
    of the hearers with a hearty amen.

    Elder Fielding remarked respecting the rich cake of which they had
    been partaking, that he considered it a type of the good things of
    that land from whence it came, and from which they had received the
    fullness of the Gospel.

    The number of official members present at this conference was then
    taken, viz., quorum of the Twelve Apostles, 9; Patriarchs, 2; High
    Priests, 16; quorum of the Seventies, 2; Elders, 31; Priests, 28;
    Teachers, 17; Deacons, 2.

    Elders Brigham Young and William Miller then sang the hymn
    "Adieu, my dear brethren," &c., and President Young blessed the
    congregation and dismissed them.

    Brigham Young, Chairman.

    Thomas Ward, Clerk.

Footnotes:

1. John Albertson was the second Patriarch ordained in England, Peter
Melling being the first, he was ordained the 17th of April, 1840.

{336}



CHAPTER XVIII.

General Conference at Nauvoo--Epistle of the Twelve to the Saints in
England--Difference between Baptists and Latter-Day Saints.

    _Minutes of the General Conference of the Church of Jesus Christ
    of Latter-day Saints held in Nauvoo, Illinois, on the 7th day of
    April, one thousand eight hundred and forty-one_.

    The names of the presidents of the several quorums were called,
    and they took their seats on the stand, with their counselors in
    front. The meeting was called to order. Choir sang a hymn; prayer
    by William Law.

    The clerk then read the report of the First Presidency, as follows--

    Report of the First Presidency.

    The Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,
    feel great pleasure in assembling with the Saints at another
    general conference, under circumstances so auspicious and cheering;
    and with greatful hearts to Almighty God for His providential
    regard, they cordially unite with the Saints, on this occasion, in
    ascribing honor, glory, and blessing to His Holy name.

    It is with unfeigned pleasure that they have to make known the
    steady and rapid increase of the Church in this state, the United
    States, and Europe. The anxiety to become acquainted with the
    principles of the Gospel, on every hand is intense, and the cry of
    "come over and help us," is reaching the Elders on the wings of
    every wind; while thousands who have heard the Gospel have become
    obedient thereto, and are rejoicing in its gifts and blessings.
    Prejudice, with its attendant train of evil, is giving way before
    the force of truth, whose benign rays are penetrating the nations
    afar off.

    The reports from the Twelve Apostles in Europe are very
    satisfactory, and state that the work continues to progress with
    unparalleled rapidity, and that the harvest is truly great. In the
    Eastern States the faithful laborers are successful, and many are
    flocking to the standard of truth {337} Nor is the South keeping
    back. Churches have been raised up in the Southern and Western
    States, and a very pressing invitation has been received from New
    Orleans, for some of the Elders to visit that city; which has
    been complied with. In our own state and immediate neighborhood,
    many are avowing their attachment to the principles of our holy
    religion, and have become obedient to the faith.

    Peace and prosperity attend us; and we have favor in the sight
    of God and virtuous men. The time was, when we were looked upon
    as deceivers, and that "Mormonism" would soon pass away, come to
    nought, and be forgotten. But the time has gone by when it is
    looked upon as a transient matter, or a bubble on the wave, and
    it is now taking a deep hold in the hearts and affections of all
    those who are noble-minded enough to lay aside the prejudice of
    education, and investigate the subject with candor and honesty. The
    truth, like the sturdy oak, has stood unhurt amid the contending
    elements, which have beat upon it with tremendous force. The
    floods have rolled, wave after wave, in quick succession, and have
    not swallowed it up. "They have lifted up their voice, O Lord;
    the floods have lifted up their voice; but the Lord of Hosts is
    mightier than the mighty waves of the sea;" nor have the flames of
    persecution, with all the influence of mobs, been able to destroy
    it; but like Moses' bush, it has stood unconsumed, and now at this
    moment presents an important spectacle both to men and angels.
    Where can we turn our eyes to behold such another? We contemplate a
    people who have embraced a system of religion, unpopular, and the
    adherence to which has brought upon them repeated persecutions.
    A people who, for their love to God, and attachment to His
    cause, have suffered hunger, nakedness, perils, and almost every
    privation. A people who, for the sake of their religion, have
    had to mourn the premature death of parents, husbands, wives,
    and children. A people, who have preferred death to slavery and
    hypocrisy, and have honorably maintained their characters, and
    stood firm and immovable, in times that have tried men's souls.
    Stand fast, ye Saints of God, hold on a little while longer, and
    the storm of life will be past, and you will be rewarded by that
    God whose servants you are, and who will duly appreciate all
    your toils and afflictions for Christ's sake and the Gospel's.
    Your names will be handed down to posterity as Saints of God and
    virtuous men.

    But we hope that those scenes of blood will never more occur, but
    that many, very many, such scenes as the present will be witnessed
    by the Saints, and that in the Temple, the foundation of which has
    been so happily laid, will the Saints of the Most High continue to
    congregate from year to year in peace and safety.

    From the kind and generous feelings, manifested by the citizens of
    {338} this state, since our sojourn among them, we may continue
    to expect the enjoyment of all the blessings of civil and
    religious liberty, guaranteed by the Constitution. The citizens
    of Illinois have done themselves honor, in throwing the mantle of
    the Constitution over a persecuted and afflicted people: and have
    given evident proof that they are not only in the enjoyment of the
    privileges of freemen themselves, but also that they willingly and
    cheerfully extend that invaluable blessing to others, and that they
    freely award to faithfulness and virtue their due.

    The proceedings of the legislature, in regard to the citizens of
    this place, have been marked with philanthropy and benevolence; and
    they have laid us under great and lasting obligations, in granting
    us the several liberal charters we now enjoy, and by which we hope
    to prosper until our city becomes the most splendid, our University
    the most learned, and our Legion the most effective of any in the
    Union. In the language of one of our own poets, we would say--

  In Illinois we've found a safe retreat,
  A home, a shelter from oppression dire;
  Where we can worship God as we think right,
  And mobbers come not to disturb our peace;
  Where we can live and hope for better days,
  Enjoy again our liberty, our rights:
  That social intercourse which freedom grants,
  And charity requires of man to man.
  And long may charity pervade each breast,
  And long may Illinois remain the scene
  Of rich prosperity, by _peace secured_.

    In consequence of the impoverished condition of the Saints, the
    buildings which are in course of erection do not progress as fast
    as could be desired; but from the interest which is generally
    manifested by the Saints at large, we hope to accomplish much by a
    combination of effort, and a concentration of action, and erect the
    Temple and other public buildings, which we so much need for our
    mutual instruction and the education of our children.

    From the reports which have been received, we may expect a large
    emigration this season. The proclamation which was sent, some time
    ago, to the churches abroad, has been responded to, and great
    numbers are making preparations to come and locate themselves in
    this city and vicinity.

    From what we now witness, we are led to look forward with pleasing
    anticipation to the future, and soon expect to see the thousands
    of Israel flocking to this region in obedience to the heavenly
    command; numerous inhabitants--Saints--thickly studding the flowery
    and {339} wide-spread prairies of Illinois; temples for the worship
    of our God erecting in various parts, and great peace resting upon
    Israel.

    We would call the attention of the Saints more particularly to the
    building of the Temple, for on its speedy erection great blessings
    depend. The zeal which is manifested by the Saints in this city is,
    indeed, praiseworthy, and, we hope will be imitated by the Saints
    in the various stakes and branches of the Church, and that those
    who cannot contribute labor will bring their gold and their silver,
    their brass and their iron, with the pine tree, and box tree, to
    beautify the same.

    We are glad to hear of the organization of the different quorums in
    this city, and hope that their organization will be attended to in
    every stake and branch of the Church, for the Almighty is a lover
    of order and good government.

    From the faith and enterprise of the Saints generally, we feel
    greatly encouraged and cheerfully attend to the important duties
    devolving upon us, knowing that we not only have the approval of
    heaven, but also that our efforts for the establishment of Zion and
    the spread of truth, are cheerfully seconded by the thousands of
    Israel.

    In conclusion we would say, brethren, be faithful, let your love
    and moderation be known unto all men; be patient, be mindful to
    observe all the commandments of your Heavenly Father, and the God
    of all grace shall bless you. Even so, Amen.

    Joseph Smith, President,

    Robert B. Thompson, Clerk.

    On motion, Resolved that the report be printed in the _Times and
    Seasons_.

    President Rigdon arose and stated that, in consequence of weakness
    from his labors of yesterday, he would call upon General John C.
    Bennett to officiate in his place.

    General Bennett then read the revelations from "The Book of the
    Law of the Lord," which had been received since the last general
    conference, in relation to writing a proclamation to the kings of
    the earth, building a temple in Nauvoo, the organization of the
    Church, &c. [1]

    President Joseph Smith rose, and made some observations in
    explanation of the same; and likewise of the necessity which
    existed of building the Temple, that the Saints might have a
    suitable place for worshiping the Almighty; and also the building
    of the Nauvoo Boarding House, that suitable accommodations may be
    afforded for the strangers who visit this city.

    The choir sung a hymn, and the meeting adjourned for one hour.

    {340} Conference met pursuant to adjournment, and was called to
    order by William Law.

    Choir sung a hymn, and President William Marks addressed the throne
    of grace.

    General Bennett read the charters granted by the legislature of
    this state, for incorporating "the City of Nauvoo," "the Nauvoo
    Legion," "the University of the City of Nauvoo," "the Agricultural
    and Manufacturing Association," and "the Nauvoo House Association."

    On motion, Resolved that the charters now read be received by the
    Church.

    President Don Carlos Smith arose, and gave an exhortation to the
    assembly.

    General John C. Bennett then spoke at some length on the present
    situation, prospects, and condition of the Church, and remarked
    that the hand of God must indeed be visible, in accomplishing the
    great blessings and prosperity of the Church, and called upon the
    Saints to be faithful and obedient in all things, and likewise
    forcibly and eloquently urged the necessity of being united in all
    their movements; and before he sat down, he wished to know how many
    of the Saints who were present felt disposed to continue to act
    in concert and follow the instructions of the First Presidency;
    and called upon all those who did so, to arise on their feet--when
    immediately the Saints, almost without exception, arose.

    The choir sung a hymn, and the meeting, after prayer, adjourned
    until tomorrow morning.

_Thursday, 8th_.

    Thursday morning, April 8. At an early hour this morning the
    different quorums, who had previously been organized, came to the
    ground and took their seats as follows: The First Presidency, with
    the presidents of the quorums on the stand, the High Council on the
    front of the stand, the High Priests on the front to the right of
    the stand, the Seventies immediately behind the High Priests, the
    Elders in the front to the left, the Lesser Priesthood on the right.

    On motion, Resolved, that this conference continue until Sunday
    evening.

    President Joseph Smith declared the rule of voting to be, a
    majority in each quorum; exhorted them to deliberation, faith,
    and prayer; and that they should be strict and impartial in
    their examinations. He then told them that the presidents of
    the different quorums would be presented before them for their
    acceptance or rejection.

    Bishop Whitney then presented the First Presidency to the Lesser
    {341} Priesthood. President John A. Hicks presented them to the
    Elders' quorum. President Joseph Young presented them to the
    quorums of the Seventies. President Don Carlos Smith presented
    them to the High Priests' quorum. Counselor Elias Higbee presented
    them to the High Council; and the clerk then presented them to
    the presidents of all the quorums on the stand, and they were
    unanimously accepted. John C. Bennett was presented, with the First
    Presidency, as Assistant President until President Rigdon's health
    should be restored.

    The presidents and counselors belonging to the several quorums
    were then presented to each quorum separately, for approval or
    rejection, when the following persons were objected to, viz., John
    A. Hicks, president of the Elders' quorum; Alanson Ripley, Bishop;
    Elder John E. Page, one of the Twelve Apostles; and Noah Packard,
    High Priest. Bishop Newel K. Whitney moved their cases be laid
    over, to be tried before the several quorums.

    President Joseph Smith presented the building committee of the
    "House of the Lord," viz., Alpheus Cutler, Reynolds Cahoon, and
    Elias Higbee, to the several quorums collectively, and they were
    unanimously received.

    President Smith observed that it was necessary that someone should
    be appointed to fill the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, in the
    room of the late Elder David W. Patten; whereupon President Rigdon
    nominated Elder Lyman Wight to that office; and he was unanimously
    accepted. Elder Wight stated that it was an office of great honor
    and responsibility, and he felt inadequate to the task; but,
    inasmuch as it was the wish of the authorities of the Church that
    he should take that office, he would endeavor to magnify it.

    _Resolved_: That James Allred be appointed to the office of High
    Councilor, in the place of Charles C. Rich, who had been chosen a
    counselor to the president of this stake, and that Leonard Soby
    be appointed one of the High Council, in the room of David Dort,
    deceased.

    The choir sung a hymn, and after prayer by President Rigdon, the
    meeting adjourned for two hours.

    Conference met pursuant to adjournment. A hymn was sung by the
    choir.

    President Rigdon delivered an interesting discourse on the subject
    of "Baptism for the dead."

    President Joseph Smith followed on the same subject; and threw
    considerable light on the doctrine which had been presented.

    The choir then sung a hymn; and after prayer by Elder William
    Smith, conference adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 o'clock.

    Friday morning, the 9th, conference met pursuant to adjournment.

    The quorums reported that they had investigated the conduct of the
    {342} persons who had been objected to, and that they had rejected
    Alanson Ripley and James Foster. Leave was given to James Foster to
    make a few remarks respecting the charges preferred against him:
    after which it was resolved that Elder James Foster continue his
    standing in the Church. _Resolved_: That, as Alanson Ripley has
    not appeared to answer the charges preferred against him, that his
    Bishopric be taken from him.

    President Joseph Smith made some observations respecting the duty
    of the several quorums, in sending their members into the vineyard,
    and also stated that labor on the Temple would be as acceptable to
    the Lord, as preaching in the world, and that it was necessary that
    some agents should be appointed to collect funds for building the
    Temple.

    _Resolved_: That John Murdock, Lyman Wight, William Smith, Henry
    William Miller, Amasa Lyman, Leonard Soby, Gehiel Savage, and Zenos
    H. Gurley be appointed to travel and collect funds for the same.

    A hymn was then sung by the choir. Prayer by President Don Carlos
    Smith.

    President Joseph Smith then stated that he should resign the
    meeting to the presidency of the stake, and the president of the
    High Priests' quorum.

    The building committee were called upon to address the assembly.
    Elder Cahoon spoke at length on the importance of building the
    Temple, and called upon the Saints to assist them in their great
    undertaking. Elder Alpheus Cutler made some very appropriate
    remarks.

    Conference adjourned one hour.

    Conference met pursuant to adjournment.

    Elias Higbee spoke on the same subject [_i. e_. importance of
    building the Temple]. Elder Lyman Wight then came forward and
    addressed the meeting at considerable length.

    The clerk read a letter from Elder John Taylor in England, to
    President Joseph Smith, which gave an account of the prosperity of
    the work of the Lord in that land.

    On motion, adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 o'clock.

    Saturday, 10th. The weather was unfavorable, consequently no
    business was transacted.

    Sunday, 11th. The conference again met.

    Elder Zenos H. Gurley preached on the literal fulfillment of
    prophecy.

    President Rigdon made some observations on baptism for the
    remission of sins.

    Conference adjourned for one hour.

    Conference met, and was addressed by the Bishops of the stake,
    who stated the situation of the poor who had to be supported, and
    called upon the Saints to assist in relieving the necessities of
    the widows and fatherless.

    {343} Elder Lyman Wight made some observations on the subject.

    President Joseph Smith then addressed the assembly, and stated that
    in consequence of the severity of the weather the Saints had not
    received as much instruction as he desired, and that some things
    would have to be laid over until the next conference. As there were
    many who wished to be baptized, they would now go to the water, and
    give them opportunity.

    The procession was then organized, and proceeded to the Mississippi.

    After the baptisms were over, the conference adjourned to the first
    of October next.

    Joseph Smith, President.

    R. B. Thompson, Clerk.

On the 7th of April, 1841, the Twelve Apostles were in England and
were busy in council, visiting the Saints in Manchester, and in the
evening supped at "Mother Miller's." On the 9th, they visited the
Zoological Gardens, Manchester, England. Elder W. J. Barratt writes
from Australia, "he had arrived safe at Adelaide after a rough passage,
but had not baptized any persons. Obstacles to the introduction of the
work of the Lord are very great."

    _Letter of George A. Smith to the Star--Report of Labors_.

    Bolton, April 11, 1841.

    _Elder P. P. Pratt_:

    I thought good to give your readers (through the medium of the
    _Star_) a short account of my labors in England. I landed in
    Liverpool on the 6th of April, 1840; and, after attending the
    Preston conference, I went to the Staffordshire Potteries, where
    there were about 100 Saints; I remained there three months. The
    work continued to prosper, and 80 were added to the church in that
    time. I then left the church there to the care of Elder Alfred
    Cordon, and, in company with Elders Kimball and Woodruff, visited
    the churches in Herefordshire and vicinity. Hundreds received our
    testimony, and were baptized. From thence we proceeded to London,
    where we met with much difficulty in introducing the fullness of
    the Gospel; the hearts of the people were barred against the truth,
    but the Lord blessed our labors, and we succeeded in establishing a
    branch of the Church there. My health being poor, I was counseled
    by my brethren of the Twelve Apostles to return to the field of
    my former labors in Staffordshire; which I did, leaving in London
    {344} but eleven members. Since that time, my labors have been
    chiefly confined to the limits of the Staffordshire conference,
    which has, until lately, included Birmingham and Macclesfield,
    containing eighteen branches of the Church, 580 members having
    been added since the time I commenced laboring there. Many have
    been called to the ministry, who are faithful men, and willing to
    receive counsel. Although I have suffered much bodily affliction
    during the past year, the Lord has blessed my labors abundantly,
    and I can say I never enjoyed myself better in the discharge of my
    duty, than I have on this mission. Among the greatest blessings
    I have enjoyed, has been the privilege of attending four general
    conferences, and meeting in council with the Twelve Apostles. I
    can assure you that a meeting with those in whose company I have
    suffered so much tribulation for the Gospel's sake, both at home
    and abroad, by land and sea, is to me a privilege indeed. I am
    now preparing to return home with my brethren, according to the
    instructions of the First Presidency of the Church; and, as I take
    my leave of the Saints in this land, my prayer to God is that He
    will preserve His people from the hand of Satan, and prepare them
    for the coming Redeemer, who is near at hand.

    I remain your servant for the Gospel's sake,

    George A. Smith.

_Tuesday, 13_.--Elder Heber C. Kimball left Manchester for Preston.

_Thursday 15_.

    _Conference in New York City_.

    A conference of the Church was held in New York City. Elder George
    W. Harris, of Nauvoo, chairman. Lucien R. Foster was elected
    president of the branch, and Addison Everett and George Holmes,
    his counselors. John M. Bernhisel was elected Bishop, and Richard
    Burge and William Acker his counselors. These six, having been
    chosen, were ordained and set apart to the several offices under
    the direction of Elder Harris, he having been specially appointed
    and authorized by President Hyrum Smith, at the Philadelphia
    conference, to organize more perfectly the branch in New York.

    Lucien R. Foster, Secretary.

    _An Epistle of the Twelve Apostles to the Church of Jesus Christ
    of Latter-day Saints in England, Scotland, Ireland, Wales, and the
    Isle of Man, Greeting_:

    Beloved Brethren:--Inasmuch as we have been laboring for some time
    in this country, and most of us are about to depart for the land
    of {345} our nativity; and, feeling anxious for your welfare and
    happiness in time and in eternity, we cheerfully offer you our
    counsel in the closing number of the first volume of the _Star_,
    hoping you will peruse it when we are far away, and profit by the
    same.

    First of all, we would express our joy and thanksgiving to Him who
    rules, and knows the hearts of men, for the heed and diligence
    with which the Saints in this county have hearkened to the counsel
    of those whom God has seen fit to send among them, and who hold
    the keys of this ministry. By this means a spirit of union, and,
    consequently, of power, has been generally cultivated among you.
    And now let the Saints remember that which we have ever taught
    them, both by precept and example, viz., to beware of an aspiring
    spirit, which would lift you up one above another, to seek to be
    the greatest in the kingdom of God. This is that spirit which
    hurled down the angels. It is that spirit which actuates all
    the churches of the sectarian world, and most of the civil and
    military movements of the men of the world. It is that spirit
    which introduces rebellion, confusion, misrule, and disunion, and
    would, if suffered to exist among us, destroy our union, and,
    consequently, our power, which flows from the Spirit, through the
    Priesthood; which Spirit, and power, and Priesthood, can only exist
    with the humble and meek of the earth. Therefore, beware, O ye
    Priests of the Most High! lest ye are overcome by that spirit which
    would exalt you above your fellow-laborers, and thus hurl you down
    to perdition, or do much injury to the cause of God.

    Be careful to respect, not the eloquence, not the smooth speeches,
    not the multitude of words, not the talents of men, but the offices
    which God has placed in the Church. Let the members hearken to
    their officers, let the Priests, Teachers, and Deacons hearken to
    the Elders, and let the Elders hearken to the presiding officers of
    each church or conference, and let all the churches and conferences
    hearken to the counsel of those who are still left in this country
    to superintend the affairs of the Church; and, by so doing, a
    spirit of union will be preserved, and peace and prosperity will
    attend the people of God.

    We have seen fit to appoint our beloved brethren and
    fellow-laborers, Levi Richards and Lorenzo Snow to travel from
    conference to conference, and to assist Brother Pratt in the
    general superintendency of the Church in this country. These are
    men of experience and soundness of principle, in whose counsel the
    Church may place entire confidence, as long as they uphold them by
    the prayer of faith.

    The spirit of emigration has actuated the children of men, from
    the time our first parents were expelled from the garden until
    now. It was this spirit that first peopled the plains of Shinar,
    and all other places; yes, it was emigration that first broke upon
    the death-like silence and {346} loneliness of an empty earth,
    and caused the desolate land to teem with life, and the desert to
    smile with joy. It was emigration that first peopled England, once
    a desolate island, on which the foot of man had never trod, but
    now abounding in towns and cities. It was emigration that turned
    the wilds of America into a fruitful field, and besprinkled the
    wilderness with flourishing towns and cities, where a few years
    since the war hoop of the savage, or the howl of the wild beasts
    was heard in the distance. In short, it is emigration that is
    the only effectual remedy for the evils which now afflict the
    over-peopled countries of Europe. With this view of the subject,
    the Saints, as well as thousands of others, seem to be actuated
    with the spirit of enterprise and emigration, and as some of them
    are calculating to emigrate to America, and settle in the colonies
    of our brethren, we would here impart a few words of counsel on the
    subject of emigration.

    It will be necessary, in the first place, for men of capital to
    go on first and make large purchases of land, and erect mills,
    machinery, manufactories, &c., so that the poor who go from this
    country can find employment. Therefore, it is not wisdom for the
    poor to flock to that place extensively, until the necessary
    preparations are made. Neither is it wisdom for those who feel a
    spirit of benevolence to expend all their means in helping others
    to emigrate, and thus all arrive in a new country empty-handed. In
    all settlements there must be capital and labor united, in order to
    flourish. The brethren will recollect that they are not going to
    enter upon cities already built up, but are going to "build cities
    and inhabit them." Building cities cannot be done without means
    and labor. On this subject we would call the particular attention
    of the Saints to the Epistle, and also to the proclamation signed
    by the First Presidency of the Church, published in the eleventh
    number of this work (the _Star_), and would earnestly exhort them
    to observe the order and instructions there given.

    We would also exhort the Saints not to go in haste, nor by flight,
    but to prepare all things in a proper manner before they emigrate;
    and especially in regard to their dealings with the world, let them
    be careful to settle everything honestly, as becometh Saints, as
    far as lies in their power, and not go away in debt, so far as they
    have the means to pay. And if any go away in debt, because they
    have not the means to pay, let it be with the design of paying as
    industry shall put it in their power, so that the cause of truth be
    not evil spoken of.

    We have found that there are so many "pick-pockets," and so many
    that will take every possible advantage of strangers in Liverpool,
    that we have appointed Elder Amos Fielding as the agent of the
    Church to superintend the fitting out of the Saints from Liverpool
    to America.

    Whatever information the Saints may want about the preparation
    for {347} a voyage, they are advised to call on Elder Fielding
    at Liverpool, as their first movement when they arrive there
    as emigrants. There are some brethren who have felt themselves
    competent to do their own business in these matters and, rather
    despising the counsel of their friends, have been robbed and
    cheated out of nearly all they had. A word of caution to the wise
    is sufficient. It is also a great saving to go in companies,
    instead of going individually.

    First, a company can charter a vessel, so as to make the passage
    much cheaper than otherwise.

    Secondly, provisions can be purchased at wholesale, for a company,
    much cheaper than otherwise.

    Thirdly, this will avoid bad company on the passage.

    Fourthly, when a company arrives at New Orleans they can charter a
    steamboat, so as to reduce the passage near one-half. This measure
    will save some hundreds of pounds on each ship load.

    Fifthly, a man of experience can go as leader of each company, who
    will know how to avoid rogues and knaves.

    Sovereigns are more profitable than silver or any other money, in
    emigrating to America; and the brethren are also cautioned against
    the American money, when they arrive in that country. Let them not
    venture to take paper money of that country, until they become well
    informed in regard to the different banks, for very few of them
    will pass current very far from the place where they are issued,
    and banks are breaking almost daily.

    It is much cheaper going by New Orleans than by New York; but it
    will never do for emigrants to go by New Orleans in the summer, on
    account of the heat and sickness of the climate. It is, therefore,
    advisable for the Saints to emigrate in autumn, winter, or spring.

    Let the Saints be careful also to obtain a letter of
    recommendation, from the Elders where they are acquainted, to the
    brethren where they are going, certifying their membership; and
    let the Elders be careful not to recommend any who do not conduct
    themselves as Saints; and especially those who would go with a
    design to defraud their creditors.

    In regard to ordaining and licensing officers, each conference is
    now organized under the care of their respective presidents, who,
    with the voice of the Church, may ordain, according to the gifts
    and callings of God, by the Holy Spirit, and under the general
    superintendence of Elders Pratt, Richards, and Snow. Licenses
    should be signed by the presiding officers.

    There are many other items of importance, which we would gladly
    mention, had we time and space sufficient; but this must suffice
    for the present; and may the God of our fathers bless you all with
    wisdom and {348} grace to act each your part in the great work
    which lies before you, that the world may be warned, and thousands
    brought to the knowledge of the truth; and may He bless and
    preserve you blameless until the day of His coming. Brethren and
    sisters, pray for us.

    We remain, your brethren in the new and everlasting covenant,

    Brigham Young,

    Heber C. Kimball,

    Orson Hyde,

    Parley P. Pratt,

    Orson Pratt,

    Willard Richards,

    Wilford Woodruff,

    John Taylor,

    Geo. A. Smith.

    Manchester, April 15, 1841.

Elders Brigham Young, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith,
and Levi Richards went from Manchester to Liverpool to attend a
tea-party at the Music Hall.

    Difference Between the Baptist and Latter-Day Saints, from the
    "North Staffordshire Mercury."

    Sir:--In a late publication, you reported the case of some
    persons who were taken before T. B. Ross, Esq., for disturbing a
    congregation of Latter-day Saints, or believers in the "Book of
    Mormon." A teacher of that sect, on being asked by the magistrate
    wherein they differed from the Baptists, replied, "In the laying
    on of hands;" but declined making an honest confession of those
    peculiarities which separate them as widely from the Baptists, as
    from every other denomination of the Christian church. This was
    certainly prudent; but as the Baptists feel themselves dishonored
    by such an alliance, they would be unjust to themselves were they
    to leave unanswered such a libel upon their denomination. The
    following very prominent marks of difference will enable your
    readers to judge for themselves.

    1. The Saints admit all persons indiscriminately to baptism,
    encouraging them to pass through that rite, with the promise that
    great spiritual improvement will follow. They baptize for remission
    of sins, without waiting for creditable evidence of repentance
    for sin. But the Baptists admit none to that ordinance who do not
    exhibit this qualification in the most satisfactory manner; and if
    they found a candidate looking to the water of baptism as having
    virtue to cleanse him from sin, he would be put back until better
    instructed.

    {349} 2. After baptism the Saints kneel down, and their Priest,
    laying on his hands, professes to give them the Holy Ghost. If
    effects similar to those produced by the laying on of the Apostles'
    hands were seen to follow, skepticism must yield to the force of
    such evidence; but in their case no such effects are produced; the
    baptized sinner is a sinner still, though flattered and deluded
    with the epithet "Latter-day Saint." The Baptists regard such
    mummery with as much disgust as all Christians do.

    3. Having, as they suppose, the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit,
    the Saints consistently pretend to have the power of working
    wonders, and process to heal the sick with holy oil; also to the
    power of prophecy. As most moral evils bring with them their
    own remedy, these lofty pretensions will ruin them in due time,
    by opening the eyes of the most deluded, as in the case of the
    countless sects of impostors who have appeared upon the stage
    before them. It need not be added, that the Baptists stand far
    removed from such conceits, and have no part in them.

    4. Not satisfied with the Bible as a complete revelation from God,
    the "Latter-day Saints" have adopted a romance, written in America,
    as a fresh revelation, and have added a trashy volume of 600 pages
    to that book, which we are forbidden to add to, or take from,
    under the most awful penalties! But even this is not enough for
    their impious resumption. They have published a monthly magazine,
    in which "new revelations" are served up fresh, as they arrive,
    for the use of all who can swallow them. The disgust with which
    the Baptists regard such a melancholy exhibition of human folly
    and wickedness, separates them to an impassable distance from such
    people.

    5. In order to carry on this order of things, the Latter-day Saints
    have appointed two Priesthoods. "The Lesser, or Aaronic Priesthood,
    is to hold the keys of the ministering of angels, and to administer
    in outward ordinances. The power and authority of the higher, or
    Melchisedek Priesthood, is to hold the keys of all the spiritual
    blessings of the Church--to have the privilege of receiving the
    mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven--to have the heavens opened
    to them--to commune with the general assembly and Church of the
    First-born; and to enjoy the communion and presence of God the
    Father, and of Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant," (see page
    13). So that, in this wonderful Priesthood, they have provided for
    an ample supply of new things, in endless variety, and without
    end, from the hands of wretched men, who blasphemously aspire to a
    dignity which belongs alone to Him who is the only "Priest forever
    after the order of Melchisedek."

    The fear of trespassing upon your valuable columns, Mr. Editor,
    prevents my enlarging upon these and very many other points of
    {350} difference; but enough has been done to show your readers,
    that no two sects can differ more widely from each other, than the
    Baptists and the Latter-day Saints; and that to confound them in
    any way together is not only unjust to the former, but involves
    them in the disgrace of being partakers in a bold imposition, or
    a pitiable delusion, which they regard with equal abhorrence and
    disgust.

    A Baptist.

    Hanley, Feb. 16, 1841.

The foregoing article attempts to show the difference between the
Baptists and Latter-day Saints. We will now attempt to show the
difference between the Baptists and Former-day Saints.

    The Difference Between the Baptists and the Former-Day Saints.

    1st. The Former-day Saints baptized _for remission of sins, _Acts
    ii: 38. The Baptists baptize those only who are supposed to have
    their sins forgiven before they are baptized.

    2nd. The Former-day Saints admitted all persons indiscriminately
    to baptism, as soon as they professed faith and repentance,
    encouraging them to pass through that rite, with the promise that
    great spiritual improvement would follow, Acts ii: 38-41 inclusive.
    But if the Baptists found the penitent believer looking for
    remission of sins through that rite, they would be put back to "get
    religion" where they could find it.

    3rd. After baptism, the Former-day Saints prayed for, and laid
    hands on the disciples in the name of Jesus, and professed to
    give them the Holy Ghost, Acts viii: 17, also Acts xix: 6. The
    Baptists say, "They regard such mummery with as much disgust as all
    Christians do."

    4th. Having, as they supposed, the extraordinary gifts of the
    Spirit, the Former-day Saints consistently pretended to have the
    power of working wonders, and professed to heal the sick with
    holy oil; James v: 14, 15. Also to the power of prophecy; First
    Corinthians from 12th to 14th chapter. It need not be added that
    the Baptists stand far removed from "such conceits," and have no
    part in them; nor in anything pertaining to the gifts and power
    of God: or, to use the Apostle's own words, "they have a form of
    godliness, denying the power."

    5th. Not satisfied with the Bible as a complete revelation from
    God, the Former-day Saints have added a volume of several hundred
    pages (the New Testament), to that book, which (according to
    Baptist logic) {351} Moses forbid them to add to, or take from; but
    new revelations were served up almost daily, fresh as they arrived,
    for all those who could swallow them. "The disgust with which the
    Baptists regard such things, considering them but a melancholy
    exhibition of human folly and wickedness," separates them to an
    impassable distance from the Former-day Saints; and how, with all
    these differences, the Baptists should ever have been thought,
    by themselves, or anybody else, to be the Church of Christ, is
    difficult to imagine!

    6th. In order to carry on their strange work, or order of things,
    the Former-day Saints had two Priesthoods. The Aaronic Priesthood
    administered in outward ordinances, as in the case of John the
    Baptist. The power and authority of the higher, or Melchisedek
    Priesthood, was to hold the keys of all the spiritual blessing
    of the Church, as Jesus said, "I give unto thee the keys of the
    kingdom of heaven--whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be
    bound in heaven," &c. They were to have the privilege of knowing
    the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. "To you it is given to know
    the mysteries of the kingdom"--to have the heavens opened unto
    them--to commune with the general assembly and Church of the First
    born; and to enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father,
    and of Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant: Heb. xii: 22, 23,
    24. So that in this wonderful Priesthood, they have provided for
    an ample supply of new things, in endless variety, and without
    end, from those who are and were counted the off-scouring of all
    things; and who, as the Baptists would insinuate, "did aspire to
    a dignity," which they say, "Belongs alone to Him who is the only
    Priest forever after the order of Melchisedek."

    The fear of trespassing upon the time and patience of our readers,
    prevents our enlarging upon these and many other points of
    difference; but enough has been said to show, that no two sects can
    possibly differ more widely from each other than do the Baptists
    and Former-day Saints, and to amalgamate the two systems in any way
    is not only an act of injustice--but would involve the Baptists,
    who by the way are an honorable body, in the disgrace of that sect
    which was "everywhere spoken against." See Acts 28:23.

Footnotes:

1. This is the revelation of 19th January, 1841, now section cxxi,
Doctrine and Covenants.

{352}



CHAPTER XIX.

Organization of the Nauvoo Legion--Notable Persons at Nauvoo--The
Prophet's Sermon on Individual Responsibility for Sin and the Doctrine
of Election.

[Sidenote: The Twelve Embark for Home.]

_Tuesday, 20_.--Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt,
Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, George A. Smith and Willard Richards
and family, went on board of the ship _Rochester_, at Liverpool,
Captain Woodhouse (who delayed his sailing two days, to accommodate the
Elders), bound for New York with a company of 130 Saints.

Elder Parley P. Pratt tarried in England to preside over the Church,
and continue the publication of the _Millennial Star_, and Elder Hyde
to pursue his mission to Jerusalem.

Mr. James Robinson, Assessor for the City of Nauvoo, died, aged 30. He
had resided in this county many years, and for his business habits and
kind disposition, he was highly respected.

_Wednesday, 21_.--The _Rochester_ sailed.

[Sidenote: Changes in the Iowa Stake.]

_Saturday, 24_.--The High Council of Iowa selected David Pettigrew
and Moses Nickerson Counselors to President John Smith, in place
of Reynolds Cahoon and Lyman Wight, removed by appointment; James
Emmett in the place of David Pettigrew in the High Council, Joseph C.
Kingsbury in place of George W. Pitkin, removed to Nauvoo, and William
Clayton in place of Erastus Snow, absent.

_Monday, 26_.--I attended the City Council. Several members being
absent, I moved that the Marshall be ordered to enforce the attendance
of Aldermen and {353} Councillors, at one o'clock on Saturday next, and
Council adjourned.

_Wednesday, 28_.--The ship _Rochester_ encountered a tempest, shipped a
heavy sea, Wilford Woodruff got thoroughly drenched; Willard Richards
escaped under the bulwarks.

_Saturday, May 1_.--Elder Robert B. Thompson became associate editor of
the _Times and Seasons_.

[Sidenote: Organization of the Legion.]

The first Regiment, first cohort of the Nauvoo Legion, consisting of
four companies, was organized, and Captain George Miller was elected
colonel; Captain Stephen Markham, lieutenant-colonel, and Captain
William Wightman, major.

The first regiment, second cohort, consisting of four companies, was
also organized, and Captain Charles C. Rich was elected colonel,
Captain Titus Billings, lieutenant-colonel, and Captain John Scott,
major.

Also the second regiment, second cohort, consisting of four companies,
was organized, and Captain Francis M. Higbee was elected colonel;
Captain Nelson Higgins, lieutenant-colonel, and Aaron H. Golden, major.

I attended the City Council, and moved that the sympathies of the
Council be tendered to the relatives of James Robinson, deceased, the
late assessor and collector for the city, which was carried.

[Sidenote: New Burying Ground for Nauvoo.]

I also moved that a new burying ground be procured, outside the city
limits, and purchased at the expense of the corporation; which was
carried; and Alderman Daniel H. Wells, and councillors Wilson Law and
John T. Barnett were appointed a committee, and ten acres were ordered
to be purchased.

I spoke at length on the rights and privileges of the owners of the
ferry, showing that the City Council has no right to take away ferry
privileges, once granted, without damages being paid to the proprietor;
and also moved that an ordinance be passed to protect citizens killing
{354} dogs running at large, which were set upon cattle or hogs, or
molest individuals. And also spoke on other subjects before the council.

_Sunday, 2_.--The Teachers' quorum was organized in Nauvoo, Elisha
Averett, President, James Hendricks and James W. Huntsman, Counselors.

_Tuesday, 4_.--

    _Nauvoo Legion Affairs_.

    Headquarters, Nauvoo Legion, City of

    Nauvoo, Illinois, May 4, 1841.

    General Orders. Pursuant to an act of the Court Martial, the troops
    attached or belonging to the Legion will parade at the place of
    general rendezvous, in the City of Nauvoo, for drill, review and
    inspection, on Saturday, the 3rd day of July, at half-past nine
    o'clock a. m., armed and equipped according to law. At ten o'clock
    the line will be formed and the general officers conducted to
    their posts, under a fire of artillery. The commandants of the 1st
    and 2nd companies, 2nd battalion, 1st regiment, 2nd cohort, are
    directed to enroll every man residing within the bounds of their
    respective commands, and not attached to any other company of the
    Legion, between the ages of eighteen and forty-five years, and
    notify them of their attachment to the service, and their legal
    liabilities.

    As will be seen by the following legal opinion of Judge Douglas,
    of the Supreme Court of the State of Illinois, than whom no man
    stands more deservedly high in the public estimation, as an able
    and profound jurist, politician and statesman; the officers and
    privates, belonging to the Legion, are exempt from all military
    duty, not required by the legally constituted authorities thereof.
    They are, therefore, expressly inhibited from performing any
    military services, not ordered by the general officers, or directed
    by the court martial:

    City Of Nauvoo, Illinois, May 3, 1841.

    _General Bennett_:

    Dear Sir.--In reply to your request, I have examined so much of the
    Nauvoo City Charter, and Legislative Acts, as relate to the "Nauvoo
    Legion," and am clearly of opinion, that any citizen of Hancock
    county, who may attach himself to the Nauvoo Legion, has all the
    privileges that appertain to which independent military body, and
    is exempt from all other military duty, as provided in the 25th
    section of the City Charter; and cannot, therefore, be fined any
    military or civil court, for neglecting or refusing to parade with
    any other military body, or {355} under the command of any officers
    who are not attached to said Legion. The language of the laws upon
    this subject, is so plain and specific as to admit of no doubt as
    to its true meaning and intent. I do not consider it necessary,
    therefore, to enter into an argument to prove a position which is
    evident from an inspection of the laws themselves.

    I am very respectfully, your friend,

    S. A. Douglas.

    The Legion is not, as has been falsely represented by its enemies,
    exclusively a "Mormon" military association, but a body of citizen
    soldiers, organized (without regard to political preferences or
    religious sentiments) for the public defense, the general good,
    and the preservation of law and order--to save the innocent,
    unoffending citizens from the iron grasp of the oppressor and
    perpetuate and sustain our free institutions against misrule,
    anarchy, and mob violence; no other views are entertained or
    tolerated. The general parades of the Legion will be in the City
    of Nauvoo, but all other musters will be within the bounds of the
    respective companies, battalions, regiments and cohorts.

    The 8th section of "An Act for the Organization and Government of
    the Militia of this State," in force July 2, 1833, provides that
    "when any person shall enroll himself in a volunteer company, he
    shall forthwith give notice in writing to the commanding officer
    of the company in which he was enrolled," &c., and that the
    commanding officer of a regiment or battalion, may, in a certain
    contingency, dissolve such company and some of the petty, ignorant,
    and imprudent militia officers maintain that such is still the
    law; but those blind leaders of the blind are informed that the
    11th section of "An Act Encouraging Volunteer Companies," approved
    March 2, 1837, reads as follows: "So much of the 8th section of
    an Act entitled, "An Act for the Organization and Government of
    the Militia of this State," in force July 2, 1833, as requires a
    volunteer to give notice in writing to the commanding officer of
    the company in which he was enrolled, and authorizes commandants
    of regiments to disband independent companies, be and the same is
    hereby repealed."

    If officers act upon the obsolete laws of the "little book" which
    have been repealed, years since, it will be sweet to the taste, but
    "make the belly bitter;" and should any civil or military officer
    attempt to enforce the collection of any military fines upon the
    members of the Legion, excepting when such fines are assessed by
    the court martial of the Legion, such persons are directed to apply
    to the master in chancery, for Hancock county, for an injunction to
    stay the illegal proceedings.

    The militia companies of Hancock county, and citizens generally,
    are respectfully invited to unite with the Legion, and partake of
    its privileges.

    {356} All officers are required to enforce the most rigid
    discipline on all days of public parade.

    Persons holding enrolling orders are directed to act with energy;
    consummate their trust, and make prompt returns to the office of
    the Major-General.

    The Lieutenant-General desires that all his friends should attach
    themselves to some company, either in the first or second cohort.
    This will enable them to receive correct military instruction,
    under the teachings of experienced officers, according to the drill
    and discipline of the United States army--and qualify them for
    efficient service in the cause of their beloved country and state,
    in the hour of peril.

    The eleven companies of minute men will, at all times, hold
    themselves in readiness to execute the laws, as originally
    instructed by the general officers.

    The officers and troops of the Legion are directed to treat with
    proper respect and decorum, all other officers and troops in the
    service of this state, or of the United States.

    Officers are ordered to treat their troops with marked respect;
    and, while they discharge their duties with promptitude and
    boldness as officers, they must not forget or neglect to observe
    the requisites of gentlemen.

    The second company (light infantry), 1st battalion, 1st regiment,
    2nd cohort; and the 1st company (lancers), 1st battalion, 3rd
    regiment, 2nd cohort of the Legion, will act as an escort for the
    reception of such visiting companies from Illinois and Iowa, as may
    be present. Should the Governor be present, it will be announced by
    a fire of artillery, by the 1st and 2nd companies, 1st battalion,
    1st regiment, 1st cohort, and the 1st company, 1st battalion,
    1st regiment, 2nd cohort, when he will be received by the entire
    Legion, with the honors due so conspicuous a personage as the
    Commander-in-Chief of the forces of the state.

    Officers, receiving copies of these orders, will promulgate the
    same without delay, throughout the bounds of their respective
    commands.

    Joseph Smith, Lieutenant-General.

    _Letter of the Prophet to the "Times and Seasons"--Visit of Notable
    Persons to Nauvoo_.

    City Of Nauvoo, May 6, 1841.

    _To the Editors of the "Times and Seasons_:"

    Gentlemen:--I wish, through the medium of your paper, to make known
    that, on Sunday last, I had the honor of receiving a visit from
    the Hon. Stephen A. Douglas, Justice of the Supreme Court, and
    Judge of the Fifth Judicial Circuit of the state of Illinois, and
    Cyrus Walker {357} Esq., of Macomb, who expressed great pleasure in
    visiting our city, and were astonished at the improvements which
    were made. They were officially introduced to the congregation
    who had assembled on the meeting ground, by the mayor; and they
    severally addressed the assembly.

    Judge Douglas expressed his satisfaction of what he had seen and
    heard respecting our people, and took that opportunity of returning
    thanks to the citizens of Nauvoo, for conferring upon him the
    freedom of the city; stating that he was not aware of rendering
    us any service sufficiently important to deserve such marked
    honor; and likewise spoke in high terms of our location and the
    improvements we had made, and that our enterprise and industry were
    highly creditable to us, indeed.

    Mr. Walker spoke much in favor of the place, the industry of the
    citizens, &c., and hoped they would continue to enjoy all the
    blessings and privileges of our free and glorious Constitution,
    and, as a patriot and a freeman, he was willing, at all times, to
    stand boldly in defense of liberty, and law.

    It must indeed be satisfactory to this community to know that kind
    and generous feelings exist in the hearts of men of such high
    reputation and moral and intellectual worth.

    Judge Douglas has ever proved himself friendly to this people, and
    interested himself to obtain for us our several chartes, holding at
    that time the office of Secretary of State.

    Mr. Walker also ranks high, and has long held a standing at the
    bar, which few attain, and is considered one of the most able and
    profound jurists in the state.

    The sentiments they expressed on the occasion were highly honorable
    to them as American citizens, and as gentlemen. How different
    their conduct from that of the official characters in the state
    of Missouri, whose minds were prejudiced to such an extent that,
    instead of mingling in our midst and ascertaining for themselves
    our character, kept entirely aloof, but were ready, at all times,
    to listen to those who had the "poison of adders under their
    tongues," and who sought our overthrow.

    Let every person who may have imbibed sentiments prejudicial to
    us, imitate the honorable example of our distinguished visitors
    (Douglas and Walker), and I believe they will find much less to
    condemn than they anticipated, and probably a great deal to commend.

    What makes the late visit more pleasing, is the fact that Messrs.
    Douglas and Walker have long been held in high estimation as
    politicians, being champions of the two great parties that exist
    in the state; but laying aside all party strife, like brothers,
    citizens, and friends, {358} they mingle with us, mutually disposed
    to extend to us that courtesy, respect, and friendship, which I
    hope we shall ever be proud to reciprocate.

    I am, very respectfully, yours, &c.,

    Joseph Smith.

_Saturday, 8_.--Brother William Smith is preaching in Pennsylvania.

Accounts of the progress of the Gospel from the Elders abroad are very
encouraging.

A magazine of 300 barrels of gunpowder, at Fort Moultrie, South
Carolina, exploded, blowing the fort, seven other buildings, and forty
persons to atoms.

_Wednesday, 12_.--The _Rochester_, with the Elders, came in sight of
Cape Sable, Nova Scotia.

_Saturday, 15_.--Good news has recently reached us from Tennessee, New
York, Upper Canada, and New Orleans. The Elders are baptizing in all
directions.

_Sunday, 16_.--I addressed the Saints. The following is a sketch of my
sermon by the editor of the _Times and Seasons_:

    The Prophet's Discourse.

    At 10 o'clock a. m., a large concourse of the Saints assembled on
    the meeting ground, and were addressed by President Joseph Smith,
    who spoke at considerable length.

    He commenced his observations by remarking that the kindness of
    our Heavenly Father called for our heartfelt gratitude. He then
    observed that Satan was generally blamed for the evils which we
    did, but if he was the cause of all our wickedness, men could
    not be condemned. The devil could not compel mankind to do evil;
    all was voluntary. Those who resisted the Spirit of God, would
    be liable to be led into temptation, and then the association
    of heaven would be withdrawn from those who refused to be made
    partakers of such great glory. God would not exert any compulsory
    means, and the devil could not; and such ideas as were entertained
    [on these subjects] by many were absurd. The creature was made
    subject to vanity, not willingly, but Christ subjected the same in
    hope--all are subjected to vanity while they travel through the
    crooked paths and difficulties which surround them. Where is the
    man that is free from vanity? None ever were perfect but Jesus;
    and why was He perfect? Because He was the Son of God, and had the
    fullness of the Spirit, and greater power than any man. But {359}
    notwithstanding their vanity, men look forward with hope (because
    they are "subjected in hope") to the time of their deliverance.

    The speaker then made some observations on the first principles of
    the Gospel, observing, that many of the Saints who had come from
    different states and nations had only a very superficial knowledge
    of these principles, not having heard them fully investigated.

    He then briefly stated the principles of faith, repentance, and
    baptism for the remission of sins, these were believed by some of
    the righteous societies of the day, but the doctrine of laying on
    of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost was discarded by them.

    The speaker then referred to the 6th chapter of Hebrews, 1st
    and 2nd verses. "Not laying again the foundation of repentance
    from dead works," &c, but of the doctrines of baptisms, laying
    on of hands, the resurrection, and eternal judgment, &c. That
    the doctrine of eternal judgment was perfectly understood by the
    Apostles, is evident from several passages of Scripture. Peter
    preached repentance and baptism for the remission of sins to the
    Jews who had been led to acts of violence and blood by their
    leaders; but to the rulers he said, "I would that through ignorance
    ye did it, as did also those ye ruled." "Repent, therefore, and be
    converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of
    refreshing (redemption) shall come from the presence of the Lord,
    for He shall send Jesus Christ, who before was preached unto you,"
    &c. The time of redemption here had reference to the time when
    Christ should come; then, and not till then, would their sins be
    blotted out. Why? Because they were murderers, and no murderer hath
    eternal life. Even David must wait for those times of refreshing,
    before he can come forth and his sins be blotted out. For Peter,
    speaking of him says, "David hath not yet ascended into heaven, for
    his sepulchre is with us to this day." His remains were then in the
    tomb. Now, we read that many bodies of the Saints arose at Christ's
    resurrection, probably all the Saints, but it seems that David
    did not. Why? Because he had been a murderer. If the ministers of
    religion had a proper understanding of the doctrine of eternal
    judgment, they would not be found attending the man who forfeited
    his life to the injured laws of his country, by shedding innocent
    blood; for such characters cannot be forgiven, until they have paid
    the last farthing. The prayers of all the ministers in the world
    can never close the gates of hell against a murderer.

    He then spoke on the subject of election, and read the 9th chapter
    of Romans, from which it was evident that the election there
    spoken of was pertaining to the flesh, and had reference to the
    seed of Abraham, according to the promise God made to Abraham,
    saying, "In thee, and in thy seed, all the families of the earth
    shall be {360} blessed." To them belonged the adoption and the
    covenants, &c. Paul said, when he saw their unbelief, "I wish
    myself accursed"--according to the flesh--not according to the
    spirit. Why did God say to Pharaoh, "For this cause have I raised
    thee up"? Because Pharaoh was a fit instrument--a wicked man, and
    had committed acts of cruelty of the most atrocious nature. The
    election of the promised seed still continues, and in the last day,
    they shall have the Priesthood restored unto them, and they shall
    be the "saviors on Mount Zion," the ministers of our God; if it
    were not for the remnant which was left, then might men now be as
    Sodom and Gomorrah. The whole of the chapter had reference to the
    Priesthood and the house of Israel; and unconditional election of
    individuals to eternal life was not taught by the Apostles. God did
    elect or predestinate, that all those who would be saved, should be
    saved in Christ Jesus, and through obedience to the Gospel; but He
    passes over no man's sins, but visits them with correction, and if
    His children will not repent of their sins He will discard them.

    This is an imperfect sketch of a very interesting discourse, which
    occupied more than two hours in delivery, and was listened to with
    marked attention, by the vast assembly present.

    In the afternoon the assembly was addressed by President Hyrum
    Smith.

    _Minutes of a Conference in London_.

    Conference met in London pursuant to adjournment.

    Elder Orson Hyde (of the Twelve Apostles) Lorenzo Snow, George J.
    Adams (High Priest), two Elders, several Priests, Teachers, and
    Deacons, with a respectable company of members present.

    Elder Snow represented the London branch, consisting of 74 members,
    and good prospect for increase. The branch at Bedford, represented
    by George J. Adams, consisted of 68 member, 8 Priests, 1 Teacher.
    John Griffith, Priest, represented the branch at Woolwich,
    consisted of 6 members. Elder John Bourne, who was sent to labor at
    Ipswich, was obliged to leave, there being no prospect of success,
    and the brethren refusing to entertain him, so that he had to sleep
    on the ground. In consequence of this the conference passed a
    resolution condemnatory of their conduct.

[Sidenote: Arrival of _Rochester_ at New York.]

_Wednesday, 19_.--The _Rochester_ arrived at quarantine ground, New
York, after a toilsome passage. At one time they were beset with head
winds and a tedious storm, when the Twelve Apostles united in prayer,
the storm abated, the sea became calm, and they went on their way
rejoicing.

{361} The following is copied from the _Times and Seasons_:

    The Healing of one who was Deaf.

    Batavia, N. Y., May 19, 1841.

    _To the Saints scattered abroad, and to all whom it may concern,
    greeting_:

    Be it known that on or about the first of December last, we, J.
    Shamp and Margaret Shamp, of the town of Batavia, Gennesee county,
    N. Y., had a daughter that had been deaf and dumb four and a half
    years, and was restored to her hearing, the time aforesaid, by the
    laying on of the hands of the Elders (Nathan R. Knight and Charles
    Thompson) of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,
    commonly called Mormons, through the power of Almighty God, and
    faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, as believed and practiced by them
    in these last days.

    [Signed]

    J. Shamp

    M. Shamp.

Several other instances of healing are mentioned by Brother Shamp; and
such things are common in the Church at this day, according to the
faith of the Saints.

[Sidenote: Rowdyism in New York Harbor.]

_Thursday, 20_.--The Twelve Apostles arrived at the dock in New York
about four o'clock p. m., but were prevented from landing by the
carters and rowdies, until late in the evening. Such is the confusion
in New York on the arrival of a ship, steamboat, or coach, that
strangers may well suppose the city is without mayor, marshal, police,
or any other officer, to keep the peace.

[Sidenote: Mob Violence in England.]

Elder A. Cordon attempted to speak several times at Swan Village, near
Birmingham, England, but was interrupted by a mob. Several of the
Saints were struck with stones, but none of them seriously hurt.

_Friday, 21_.--I attended City Council, and moved that Parley Street be
opened and improved to the state road.

[Sidenote: Conference in Kirtland.]

_Saturday, 22_.--A conference was held at Kirtland, Ohio, Elder Almon
W. Babbitt presiding. Elder Babbitt was elected president of that
stake, and Lester Brooks and Zebedee Coltrin his {362} counselors.
Thomas Burdick was elected Bishop of Kirtland, and Hiram Winters and
Reuben McBride his counselors. Hiram Kellogg was elected president of
the High Priests' quorum, and Amos Babcock, president of the Elders'
quorum. By-laws were adopted for the preservation of the Lord's House.

_Sunday, 23_.--The Twelve addressed the Saints at the Columbian Hall,
Grand Street, New York.

_Monday, 24_.

    Letter of the Presidency to the Saints--Concentration at Nauvoo.

    _To the Saints abroad_--

    The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
    Saints, anxious to promote the prosperity of said Church, feel it
    their duty to call upon the Saints who reside out of this county
    [Hancock], to make preparations to come in without delay. This is
    important, and should be attended to by all who feel an interest in
    the prosperity of this corner-stone of Zion. Here the Temple must
    be raised, the University built, and other edifices erected which
    are necessary for the great work of the last days, and which can
    only be done by a concentration of energy and enterprise. Let it,
    therefore, be understood, that all the stakes, excepting those in
    this county, and in Lee county, Iowa, are discontinued, and the
    Saints instructed to settle in this county as soon as circumstances
    will permit.

    Joseph Smith, President.

    City of Nauvoo, Hancock county,

    Illinois, May 24, 1841.

_Tuesday, 25_.

    _Legion Affairs_.

    Headquarters Nauvoo Legion,

    City Of Nauvoo, Illinois, May 25, 1841.

    General Orders--The 1st company (riflemen) 1st battalion, 2nd
    regiment, 2nd cohort, will be attached to the escort, contemplated
    in the general orders of the 4th inst., for the 3rd of July next.
    See p. 354.

    In forming the Legion, the adjutant will observe the rank of
    companies in the order they are named, to-wit--1st cohort; flying
    artillery lancers, visiting companies of dragoons, cavalry,
    lancers, riflemen. Second {363} cohort: artillery, lancers,
    riflemen, light infantry, infantry. Visiting companies in their
    appropriate places on the right of the troops of their own grade.

    The ranking company of the 1st cohort will be formed on the right
    of said cohort; and the ranking company of the 2nd cohort will be
    formed on the left of said cohort; the next on the left of the
    right, the next on the right of the left, and so on to the center.

    The escort will be formed on the right of the forces.

    Joseph Smith, Lieutenant-General.

_Wednesday, 26_.--Elder Lorenzo Snow writes from London, that the
Church there numbers 74 members, having baptized 18 since his return
from Manchester conference, and that Elder Orson Hyde was at the London
conference on the 16th instant.

Elder Joseph Fielding was at the Isle of Man.

_Thursday, 27_.--Elders Willard Richards, Wilford Woodruff, George
A. Smith, and John M. Bernhisel visited the shipping and principal
buildings in New York.

Sir Hugh Gough being about to storm Canton with the British forces, the
Chinese agreed to pay a ransom of $6,000,000.

_Monday, 31_.--Elder Brigham Young visited the Saints on Long Island.

{364}



CHAPTER XX.

Arrest of the Prophet on Demand of Missouri--Trial at Monmouth--The
Acquittal.

_Tuesday, June 1, 1841_.--I accompanied my brother Hyrum and William
Law, as far as Quincy, on their mission to the East.

Elder Sidney Rigdon has been ordained a Prophet, Seer, and Revelator.

Elder Brigham Young returned from Long Island to New York, Elder
Willard Richards started to Richmond, Massachusetts with his family and
Elder Wilford Woodruff to Portland, Maine.

_Friday, 4_.--Elders Young, Kimball and Taylor left New York for
Nauvoo, by way of Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, and St. Louis. Geo. A.
Smith, and Reuben Hedlock started at the same time, and went to New
Egypt, New Jersey.

[Sidenote: The Prophet's Visit with Governor Carlin.]

I called on Governor Carlin, at his residence in Quincy. During my
visit with the governor, I was treated with the greatest kindness and
respect; nothing was said about any requisition having come from the
Governor of Missouri for my arrest. In a very few hours after I had
left the Governor's residence he sent Thomas King, Sheriff of Adams
county, Thomas Jasper, a constable of Quincy, and some others as a
posse, with an officer from Missouri, to arrest me and deliver me up to
the authorities of Missouri.

[Sidenote: The Arrest of the Prophet]

_Saturday, 5_.--While I was staying at Heberlin's Hotel, {365} Bear
Creek, about twenty-eight miles south of Nauvoo, Sheriff King and posse
arrested me. Some of the posse on learning the spirit of the officer
from Missouri, left the company in disgust and returned to their
own homes. I accordingly returned to Quincy and obtained a writ of
_habeas corpus_ from Charles A. Warren, Esq., Master in Chancery; and
Judge Stephen A. Douglas happening to come to Quincy that evening, he
appointed to give a hearing on the writ on the Tuesday following, in
Monmouth, Warren county, where the court would then commence a regular
term.

[Sidenote: Apostles in New Jersey.]

Elders William Smith, and George A. Smith attended a meeting in the
woods near New Egypt, New Jersey, and preached to a large assembly;
also preached on Sunday 6th, and three were baptized; and after
preaching on the 7th four more were baptized.

[Sidenote: News of the Prophet's Arrest Reaches Nauvoo.]

_Sunday, 6_.--News of my arrest having arrived in Nauvoo last night,
and being circulated through the city, Hosea Stout, Tarleton Lewis,
William A. Hickman, John S. Higbee, Elijah Able, Uriel C. Nickerson,
and George W. Clyde started from the Nauvoo landing, in a skiff in
order to overtake me and rescue me, if necessary. They had a heavy head
wind, but arrived in Quincy at dusk; went up to Benjamin Jones's house,
and found that I had gone to Nauvoo in charge of two officers.

I returned to Nauvoo in charge of the officers (Sheriff King had been
suddenly seized with sickness; I nursed and waited upon him in my
own house, so that he might be able to go to Monmouth), and notified
several of my friends to get ready and accompany me the next morning.

_Monday, 7_.--I started very early for Monmouth, seventy-five miles
distant (taking Mr. King along with me and attending him during his
sickness), accompanied by Charles C. Rich, Amasa Lyman, Shadrack
Roundy, Reynolds Cahoon, Charles Hopkins, Alfred Randall, Elias {366}
Higbee, Morris Phelps, John P. Greene, Henry G. Sherwood, Joseph
Younger, Darwin Chase, Ira Miles, Joel S. Miles, Lucien Woodworth,
Vinson Knight, Robert B. Thompson, George Miller and others. We
traveled very late, camping about midnight in the road.

[Sidenote: The Prophet at Monmouth.]

_Tuesday, 8_.--Arrived at Monmouth and procured breakfast at the
tavern; found great excitement prevailing in the public mind, and great
curiosity was manifested by the citizens who were extremely anxious to
obtain a sight of the Prophet, expecting to see me in chains. Mr. King,
(whose health was now partly restored) had considerable difficulty
in protecting me from the mob that had gathered there. Mr. Sidney A.
Little, for the defense, moved "That the case of Mr. Smith should be
taken up," but was objected to by the States' Attorney, _pro tem_., on
account of his not being prepared, not having had sufficient notice
of the trial. By mutual consent it was accordingly postponed until
Wednesday morning.

In the evening, great excitement prevailed, and the citizens employed
several attorneys to plead against me.

I was requested to preach to the citizens of Monmouth; but as I was a
prisoner, I kept closeted in my room, for I could not even come down
stairs to my meals, but the people would be crowding the windows to get
a peep at me, and therefore appointed Elder Amasa Lyman to preach in
the Court House on Wednesday evening.

[Sidenote: The Trial.]

_Wednesday, 9_.--At an early hour the Court House was filled with
spectators desirous to hear the proceedings.

Mr. Morrison, on behalf of the people, wished for time to send to
Springfield for the indictment, it not being found with the rest of the
papers. This course would have delayed the proceedings, and, as it was
not important to the issue, the attorneys for the defense admitted that
there was an indictment, so that the investigation might proceed.

{367} Mr. Warren, for the defense, then read the petition, which stated
that I was unlawfully held in custody, and that the indictment, in
Missouri, was obtained by fraud, bribery and duress, all of which I was
prepared to prove.

Mr. Little then called upon the following witnesses, viz.,--Morris
Phelps, Elias Higbee, Reynolds Cahoon and George W. Robinson, who were
sworn. The counsel on the opposite side objected to hearing evidence
on the merits of the case, as they could not go beyond the indictment.
Upon this a warm and long discussion occurred, which occupied the
attention of the court during the entire day.

All the lawyers on the opposite side, excepting two, viz. Messrs.
Knowlton and Jennings, confined themselves to the merits of the case,
and conducted themselves as gentlemen; but it was plainly evident that
the design of Messrs. Knowlton and Jennings; was to excite the public
mind still more on the subject and inflame the passions of the people
against me and my religion.

[Sidenote: Honorable Conduct of Counsel.]

The counsel on behalf of the defense, Messrs. Charles A. Warren,
Sidney B. Little, O. H. Browning, James H. Ralston, Cyrus Walker,
and Archibald Williams, acted nobly and honorably, and stood up in
the defense of the persecuted, in a manner worthy of high-minded and
honorable gentlemen.

Some had even been told that if they engaged on the side of the
defense, they need never look to the citizens of that county for any
political favors. But they were not to be overawed by the popular
clamor or deterred from an act of public duty by any insinuations or
threats whatever, and stated, that if they had not before determined
to take a part in the defense, they, after hearing the threats of the
community, were now fully determined to discharge their duty. The
counsel for the defense spoke well without exception; and strongly
urged the legality of the court examining the testimony to prove that
the whole {368} proceedings on the part of Missouri, were base and
illegal, and that the indictment was obtained through fraud, bribery
and corruption.

The court, after hearing the counsel, adjourned about half past six p.
m.

When I was at dinner, a man rushed in and said, "Which is Jo Smith? I
have got a five dollar Kirtland bill, and I'll be damned if he don't
take it back I'll sue him, for his name is to it." I replied, "I am
the man;" took the bill and paid him the specie, which he took very
reluctantly, being anxious to kick up a fuss.

[Sidenote: Judge Douglas.]

The crowd in the court was so intense that Judge Douglas ordered the
sheriff of Warren county to keep the spectators back, but he neglected
doing so when the judge fined him ten dollars. In a few minutes he
again ordered the sheriff to keep the men back from crowding the
prisoner and witnesses. He replied, "I have told a constable to do it,"
when the judge immediately said, "Clerk, add ten dollars more to that
fine." The sheriff, finding neglect rather expensive, then attended to
his duty.

A young lawyer from Missouri volunteered to plead against me; he tried
his utmost to convict me, but was so high with liquor, and chewed so
much tobacco, that he often called for cold water. Before he had spoken
many minutes, he turned sick, requested to be excused by the court and
went out of the court house, puking all the way down stairs. As the
Illinoians call the Missouri people "pukes," this circumstance caused
considerable amusement to the members of the bar. During his plea, his
language was so outrageous that the judge was twice under the necessity
of ordering him to be silent.

Mr. O. H. Browning then commenced his plea, and in a short time the
puking lawyer returned, and requested the privilege of finishing his
plea, which was allowed.

Afterwards Mr. Browning resumed his pleadings which were powerful;
and when he gave a recitation of what he {369} himself had seen at
Quincy, and on the banks of the Mississippi river' when the Saints were
"exterminated from Missouri," where he tracked the persecuted women and
children by their bloody footmarks in the snow, they were so affecting
that the spectators were often dissolved in tears. Judge Douglas
himself and most of the officers also wept.

Elder Amasa Lyman during the evening, preached a brilliant discourse in
the Court House, on the first principles of the Gospel, which changed
the feelings of the people very materially.

    _A Letter from the Editor [1] of the "Times and Seasons" to that
    Journal Giving an Account of the Trial at Monmouth_.

    American Hotel, Monmouth, Warren County, Illinois,

    June 9, 1841. Wednesday Evening.

    We have just returned from the Court House, where we have listened
    to one of the most eloquent speeches ever uttered by mortal man,
    in favor of justice and liberty, by O. H. Browning, Esq., who has
    done himself immortal honor in the sight of all patriotic citizens
    who listened to the same. He occupied the attention of the court
    for more than two hours, and showed the falsity of the arguments
    of the opposite counsel, and laid down principles in a lucid and
    able manner which ought to guide the court in admitting testimony
    for the defendant, Joseph Smith. We have heard Browning on former
    occasions, when he has frequently delighted his audience by his
    eloquence; but on this occasion he exceeded our most sanguine
    expectations. The sentiments he advanced were just, generous and
    exalted; he soared above the petty quibbles which the opposite
    counsel urged, and triumphantly, in a manner and eloquence peculiar
    to himself, avowed himself the friend of humanity, and boldly,
    nobly and independently stood up for the rights of those who had
    waded through seas of oppression and floods of injustice, and
    had sought a shelter in the State of Illinois. It was an effort
    worthy of a high-minded and honorable gentleman, such as we ever
    considered him to be, since we have had the pleasure of his
    acquaintance. Soon after we came out of Missouri, he sympathized
    with us in our afflictions, and we are indeed rejoiced to know that
    he {370} yet maintains the same principles of benevolence. His was
    not an effort of a lawyer anxious to earn his fee, but the pure and
    patriotic feelings of Christian benevolence, and a sense of justice
    and of right. While he was answering the monstrous and ridiculous
    arguments urged by the opposing counsel, that Joseph Smith might
    go to Missouri and have his trial; he stated the circumstances of
    our being driven from that State, and feelingly and emphatically
    pointed out the impossibility of our obtaining justice there. There
    we were forbidden to enter in consequence of the order of the
    Executive, and that injustice and cruelties of the most barbarous
    and atrocious character had been practiced upon us, until the
    streams of Missouri had run with blood, and that he had seen women
    and children, barefoot and houseless crossing the Mississippi
    to seek refuge from ruthless mobs. He concluded his remarks by
    saying that to tell us to go to Missouri for a trial was adding
    insult to injury; and then he said: "_Great God! have I not seen
    it? Yes, my eyes have beheld the blood-stained traces of innocent
    women and children, in the drear winter, who had traveled hundreds
    of miles barefoot, through frost and snow, to seek a refuge from
    their savage pursuers. 'Twas a scene of horror sufficient to enlist
    sympathy from an adamantine heart. And shall this unfortunate man,
    whom their fury has seen proper to select for sacrifice, be driven
    into such a savage land and none dare to enlist in the cause of
    Justice? If there was no other voice under heaven ever to be heard
    in this cause, gladly would I stand alone, and proudly spend my
    latest breath in defense of an oppressed American citizen_."

_Thursday, 10_.--The court was opened about 8 o'clock a. m. when Judge
Douglas delivered his opinion on the case. He said:

    That the writ being once returned to the Executive by the sheriff
    of Hancock county was dead, and stood in the same relationship
    as any other writ which might issue from the Circuit Court, and
    consequently the defendant could not be held in custody on that
    writ. The other point, whether evidence in the case was admissible
    or not, he would not at that time decide, as it involved great
    and important considerations relative to the future conduct of
    the different states. There being no precedent, as far as they
    had access to authorities to guide them, but he would endeavor
    to examine the subject, and avail himself of all the authorities
    which could be obtained on the subject, before he would decide that
    point. But on the other, the defendant must be liberated.

[Sidenote: The Prophet Set Free.]

This decision was received with satisfaction by myself and the
brethren, and all those whose minds were free from {371} prejudice. It
is now decided that before another writ can issue, a new demand must be
made by the Governor of Missouri. Thus have I been once more delivered
from the fangs of my cruel persecutors, for which I thank God, my
Heavenly Father.

I was discharged about 11 a. m., when I ordered dinner for my company
now increased to about sixty men; and when I called for the bill, the
unconscionable fellow replied, "Only one hundred and sixty dollars."

About 2 p. m., the company commenced their return, traveled about
twenty miles, and camped by the wayside.

_Friday, 11_.--Started very early, arrived at La Harpe for dinner
and returned safely to Nauvoo by 4 p. m., where I was met by the
acclamation of the Saints.

Footnotes:

1. Don Carlos Smith and Robert B. Thompson were at this time editors
and publishers of the _Times and Seasons_, and the above letter was
doubtless written by Thompson as he is named as among those who
accompanied the Prophet to Monmouth, while Don Carlos Smith is not
named as being in the company.

{372}



CHAPTER XXI.

The Mission to Jerusalem--Progress of Orson Hyde in His Journey.

[Sidenote: Elder John E. Page--a Laggard.]

Elder George A. Smith met Elder John E. Page at Philadelphia, and
advised him to take up contributions to enable him to sail within
three days in the _Garrick_ for England, and overtake Elder Orson Hyde
and accompany him to Jerusalem, promising to use all the influence
and exertion in his power to assist him. Elder Page rejected the
proposition. Elder Smith subsequently learned that Elder Page had
sufficient money, without collections to have taken him through to
England.

_Tuesday, 15_.

    _Letter from Elder Orson Hyde to President Joseph Smith--Recounting
    Incidents of his Journey en Route for Jerusalem_.

    London, June 15, 1841.

    _President Smith_:

    Sir--With pleasure I take my pen to write you at this time, and
    through you to the _Times and Seasons_, and through it to the
    Saints at large, and to all whom it may concern. May grace, mercy,
    and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, rest
    upon you abundantly, and enable you to serve Him acceptably, secure
    to yourself that honor which cometh from above, guide the counsels
    of the Saints in wisdom, that peace and good will may reign
    predominant in Zion, and joy and gladness swell every grateful
    heart. Most gladly would I embrace an opportunity of a personal
    interview with you, did one offer, but such a favor is beyond my
    reach at this time. I have just seen the 12th number of the _Times
    and Seasons_, containing the minutes of your conference, the report
    of the Presidency, the celebration of the {373} anniversary of the
    Church and the laying of the foundation of the Temple. This, to me
    was a precious gem; it brought tidings from my own country, and
    from the place rendered doubly endearing from the fact that there
    is the home of my wife and children.

    I was sorry that Elder Page had been so tardy in his movements
    that objections were made to him. Most gladly would I have hailed
    him as a companion to the oriental continent; but my hopes of
    that are fled. I shall go alone or find some other person, in all
    probability, to go with me.

    I have written a book to publish in the German language, setting
    forth our doctrine and principles in as clear and concise a manner
    as I possibly could. After giving a history of the rise of the
    Church, in something the manner that Brother Orson Pratt did, I
    have written a snug little article on every point of doctrine
    believed by the Saints; I began with the Priesthood and showed that
    the Saints were not under the necessity of tracing back the dark
    and bloody stream of papal superstition to find their authority;
    neither were they compelled to seek for it among the floating and
    transient notions of Protestant reformers; but God has sent His
    holy angel directly from heaven with this seal and authority, and
    conferred it upon men with His own hands--quoting the letter and
    testimony of Oliver Cowdery; next was on the use and validity of
    the holy scriptures in the Church; next on faith, set forth from
    the scriptures and the Book of Covenants; then on repentance,
    baptism; laying on of hands; then the different offices of the
    Church; next the power and authority of each one; and, in fine,
    the whole order, doctrine and government of the Church. I have
    not written it as a law binding on the _German Saints_; but have
    taken this course to illustrate and set forth the true principles
    of our doctrine to them, fully believing that it would meet with
    the cordial approbation of those whom I have the distinguished
    honor to represent, could they but see it. I have written a lengthy
    preface and introduction to it. I here copy an extract from the
    introduction: "When in the course of divine Providence it becomes
    our duty to record one of those remarkable events which gives
    birth to a new era, and lays the foundation for the renovation of
    the moral world, it fills the mind with wonder, astonishment and
    admiration. How welcome are the rays of the morning light, after
    the shades of darkness have clothed the earth in gloom! So after
    a long and tedious night of moral darkness under which the earth
    has rolled, and her inhabitants groaned for the last fourteen
    hundred years, an angel commissioned from the Almighty, descended
    and rolled back the curtains of night from the minds of some and
    caused the sunbeams of truth to enlighten, cheer, and warm the
    hearts of many. Welcome, welcome to our earth, thou messenger of
    {374} the Most High! and thrice welcome the tidings which thou
    hast borne! O Gracious Father! I ask Thee, in the name of Thy holy
    child, Jesus, to bless with Thy royal favor, the weak exertions
    of Thy humble servant, and make this production a blessing to all
    people who may be favored with a perusal of its pages. Wherever it
    shall go let it be a messenger of conviction to the wicked, and a
    harbinger of peace to the righteous. Let its contents be borne upon
    every breeze, and wafted to the remotest climes. Let the angel of
    the covenant go before it, and prepare its way. Let its heavenly
    influence be distilled upon the rich and fertile soil of humble
    and honest hearts. Go forth, therefore, little volume to other
    nations and tongues, and may the Almighty speed your way, and like
    a sharp, two-edged sword cut the way through the prejudices of
    this generation; encamp with all thy virtues in the hearts of the
    people, and there let thy principles be enthroned."

    One thing I was pleased with, which I noticed in the _Times and
    Seasons_--the remarks made on the use of intoxicating spirits. In
    my heart they found a corresponding echo. I should not be willing
    to indulge the thought for a moment that the Saints in Nauvoo would
    quietly stand by and see a brother gorge himself with that strong
    drink which makes a hell of his home, and rolls the fiery flood of
    ruin over the affections of his once happy family. No! they will
    dash from his lips the cup of wretchedness, and sharply rebuke
    the homicide that sells to him the wine of wrath, and measures to
    him his wife's tears. * * * May the lightnings of heaven forever
    blast (I had almost said) those brewers of strong drink which send
    forth their corrupt and poisonous streams to sweep down in their
    filthy current men of sterling talents to an untimely grave. May
    the Saints of God stand as far from them as Lot stood from Sodom in
    its evil day. This dizzy flood has sometimes entered the house of
    worship, invaded the sacred desk, and hushed in death forever the
    voice that could plead like an angel, the cause of God and man.

    I have just received a note from Dr. S. Hirschell, President Rabbi
    of the Hebrew community of this country, in reply to a very polite
    note which I sent him, requesting the indulgence of a personal
    interview with him. But in consequence of a very severe accident
    which befell him he is confined to his room, and unable at this
    time to grant the asked indulgence. (His leg is broken.)

    I have addressed to him a communication upon the subject of
    my mission, a copy of which I transmit to you. It may not be
    altogether uninteresting to the Saints and friends in America.

    _Elder Hyde's Letter to Rabbi Hirschell_.

    Rev. Sir:--I cannot but express my sorrow and regret at the {375}
    misfortune under which you labor, in consequence of the severe
    accident which befell you, and by which you are confined to your
    room. Please accept, sir, the sincere wishes of a stranger,
    that you may speedily recover from the injury you sustained in
    consequence of the accident, and resume the labors which your high
    and responsible station calls you to perform.

    Feeling that I may not enjoy the privilege and happiness of a
    personal interview with you, I hope you will indulge the liberty
    which I now presume to take, in addressing a written communication
    to you, embracing some of those things which I had fondly hoped
    would have been the foundation of a mutual interchange of thought
    between us. But as Providence has laid an embargo upon that
    distinguished privilege, I must forego, at this time, the pleasure
    of a verbal relation of those things pertaining to your nation,
    with which my mind is deeply affected.

    Since I have arrived to years of more mature reflection, and become
    religiously inclined, the writings of the Jewish Prophets have won
    my affections; and the scattered and oppressed condition of that
    people has enlisted the finest sympathies of my heart. Believing,
    therefore, that the words of Hosea, the Prophet, ii: 23, connected
    with your magnanimity, will prohibit the indulgence of any
    prejudices in your feelings against the author of this production,
    in consequence of his not being able by any existing document or
    record, to identify himself with your nation.

    "About nine years ago, a young man with whom I had had a short
    acquaintance, and one, too, in whom dwelt much wisdom and
    knowledge--in whose bosom the Almighty had deposited many secrets,
    laid his hand upon my head and pronounced these remarkable
    words--'in due time thou shalt go to Jerusalem, the land of thy
    fathers, and be a watchman unto the house of Israel; and by thy
    hands shall the Most High do a great work, which shall prepare the
    way and greatly facilitate the gathering together of that people.'
    Many other particulars were told me by him at that time, which I do
    not write in this letter. But sufficient is written to show that
    divine appointment is claimed as the mainspring that has sent me
    forth from the embraces of an affectionate family and kind friends,
    as well as from the land that gave me birth."

    My labors since that period have been bestowed upon the Gentiles
    in various countries, and on both sides of the Atlantic, until
    in the early part of March, 1840, I retired to my bed one night
    as usual; and while meditating and contemplating the field of
    my future labors, the vision of the Lord, like clouds of light,
    burst into my view (see Joel ii:28). {376} The cities of London,
    Amsterdam, Constantinople and Jerusalem, all appeared in succession
    before me, and the Spirit said unto me, "Here are many of the
    children of Abraham whom I will gather to the land that I gave to
    their fathers; and here also is the field of your labors. Take,
    therefore, proper credentials from my people, your brethren, and
    also from the Governor of your state, with the seal of authority
    thereon, and go ye forth to the cities which have been shown you,
    and declare these words unto Judah, and say, blow ye the trumpet
    in the land; cry, gather together, and say, assemble yourselves,
    and let us go into the defensed cities. Set up the standard towards
    Zion--retire, stay not, for I will bring evil from the north and a
    great destruction. The lion is come up from his thicket, and the
    destroyer of the Gentiles is on his way--he is gone forth from
    his place to make thy land desolate, and thy cities shall be laid
    waste, without an inhabitant. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem,
    and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished--that her
    iniquity is pardoned, for she hath received of the Lord's hand
    doubly for all her sins. Let your warning voice be heard among the
    Gentiles as you pass; and call yet upon them in my name for aid
    and for assistance. With you it mattereth not whether it be little
    or much; but to me it belongeth to show favor unto them who show
    favor unto you." The vision continued open about six hours, that I
    did not close my eyes in sleep. In this time many things were shown
    unto me which I have never written; neither shall I write them
    until they are fulfilled in Jerusalem.

    It appears from the Prophets, that Jerusalem has none to
    guide--none to take her by the hand among all the sons whom she
    hath brought forth and reared. But these two sons are come unto
    thee! the sons of strangers shall build up thy walls.

    Permit me now, Rev. Sir, to trouble you with the reflections of a
    mind that feels completely untrammelled from every party interest,
    and from every sectarian influence.

    When I look at the condition of your fathers in the days of David
    and Solomon, and contrast that with the present condition of their
    descendants, I am led to exclaim, "How are the mighty fallen." Then
    they possessed a kingdom--a land flowing with milk and honey--then
    the strong arm of Jehovah taught the surrounding nations to pay
    tribute and homage to them--then their standard was raised high,
    their banner floated on every breeze; and under its shade the
    sons and daughters of Israel reposed in perfect safety; and the
    golden letters of light and knowledge were inscribed on its folds.
    But now, no kingdom--no country--no tribute of gain or honor--no
    standard--no security: Their sceptre has departed! and instead of
    that light and knowledge which once gave them a transient elevation
    above other nations, the height of {377} their ambition is now
    (with some honorable exceptions) the accumulation of sordid gain,
    by buying and selling the stale refuse with which their fathers
    would never have defiled their hands.

    Why this wonderful change? Is the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob
    a just God? Most certainly He is. If, then, He is a just God, of
    course He will mete out and apportion the chastisement or penalty
    to the magnitude of the offense or crime committed. Allowing,
    then, the law of Moses to be the standard by which actions are
    weighed: were not idolatry and the shedding of innocent blood
    the greatest sins which your fathers committed? And was not the
    penalty inflicted upon them for that transgression, captivity in
    Babylon seventy years? Have they ever been guilty of idolatry at
    all since their return from Babylon? No! Have they been guilty of
    shedding innocent blood, to that extent since their return, that
    they were before they were taken captive by Nebuchadnezzar? The
    Jew says, No! Very well; there will none deny, with any claim upon
    your credulity, but that the disaster and overthrow that befell
    the Jewish nation in the days of Vespasian, very far exceeded in
    severity, in almost every particular, the disaster and overthrow
    that befell them in the days of Nebuchadnezzar.

    Now, then, if God be just and mete out and apportion the
    chastisement or penalty to the magnitude of the offense or crime
    committed, it follows, of course, that your fathers committed some
    far greater crime subsequent to their return to Babylon, than ever
    they before committed. Be that crime whatever it may; know ye that
    for it, or because of it, the Roman armies were permitted to crowd
    their conquests to the heart of your city--burn your temple--kill
    your men, women and children, and disperse your remnant to the four
    quarters of the earth. The fiery storm that burst upon your nation
    at that time, and the traces of blood which they have ever since
    left behind them in their flight and dispersion, together with the
    recent cursed cruelties inflicted upon them in Damascus and Rhodes,
    but too plainly declare that the strong imprecation which they
    uttered on a certain occasion has been fulfilled upon them to the
    letter. "Let his blood be on us and on our children." If condemning
    and crucifying Jesus of Nazareth was not the cause of this great
    evil, what was the cause of it?

    Aware that I have written very plainly upon these points, that have
    come within my notice, you believe me, sir, when I assure you,
    that my pen is pointed with friendship, and dipped in the fountain
    of love and good will toward your nation. The thoughts which it
    records have proceeded from a heart grateful to the Almighty, that
    the time has arrived when the day-star of your freedom already
    begins to dispel the dark and gloomy clouds which have separated
    you from the favor of your God. Ere long it will be said to you,
    "Arise, shine, for thy light has {378} come, and the glory of the
    Lord has risen upon thee."

  The morning breaks, the shadows flee,
  Lo! Zion's standard is unfurled;
  The dawning of a brighter day
  Majestic rises on the world.

  The Gentile fulness now comes in,
  And Israel's blessings are at hand:
  Lo! Judah's remnant, cleansed from sin,
  Shall in their promised Canaan stand.

    Now, therefore, O ye children of the covenant, repent of all your
    backslidings, and begin, as in days of old, to turn to the Lord
    your God. Arise! arise! and go out from among the Gentiles; for
    destruction is coming from the north to lay their cities waste.
    Jerusalem is thy home. There the God of Abraham will deliver thee
    (Joel ii: 32.) There the bending heavens shall reveal thy long
    looked-for Messiah in fleecy clouds of light and glory, to execute
    vengeance upon thine enemies; and lead thee and thy brethren of the
    ten tribes to sure conquest and certain victory. Then shall thrones
    be cast down, and the kingdoms of this world become the kingdoms of
    our God. Then will they come from the east, west, north, south,,
    and sit down in the kingdom of God with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.
    But the children of the kingdom (Gentiles) shall be cast out, and
    the kingdom restored to Israel.

    With sentiments of distinguished consideration, I have the honor,
    sir, to subscribe myself,

    Your most obedient servant,

    Orson Hyde.

    Rev. Dr. Solomon Hirschell, President Rabbi of the Hebrew Society
    in England.

    _Conclusion of Elder Hyde's Letter to the Prophet_.

    It is very hard times in England. Thousands have nothing to do,
    and are literally starving. Trade of all sorts is at the lowest
    ebb. Very cold and dry. No harvest unless rain come soon. You will
    discover that the greater part of the English brethren have always
    worked under masters; and they have not so much notion of planning
    and shifting for themselves, particularly in a strange country, as
    the Americans. They want some one to be a kind of father to them,
    to give them plenty of work, and plenty to eat; and they will be
    content. They are a very industrious people whenever they can get
    employment: and by a little fatherly care, they will soon get
    way-wised to the country, and be enabled to shift for themselves. I
    trust that exertions are made to give {379} employment to as many
    as possible. You know the reasons there better than I do, and you
    have received a specimen of the English Saints. Now if you have
    any counsel to give concerning the gathering, in addition to that
    already given, I shall be happy to receive and execute it, as far
    as opportunity offers.

    I shall not remain here long, it is true; but Brother Pratt is
    here, and I shall return here some time if the Lord will.

    I must now close by saying for one and all, God bless Zion for ever
    and ever.

    Your brother in Christ,

    Orson Hyde.

{380}



CHAPTER XXII.

Sundry Events at Nauvoo and Throughout the World--The Mission of the
Twelve Noted by the Prophet.

[Sidenote: Press Misrepresentations.]

The newspapers of the United States are teeming with all manner of
lies, abusing the Saints of the Most High, and striving to call down
the wrath of the people upon His servants.

_Wednesday, 16_.--Elder Brigham Young and company arrived at Wheeling
at 4 p. m., and Sunday, 29th, visited the brethren at Cincinnati.

_Monday, 21_.--Hyrum Smith and William Law visited the Saints in
Chester county, Pennsylvania, on their mission east; and there met
Elder George A. Smith on his return home.

[Sidenote: Imprisonment of Theodore Curtis.]

_Tuesday, 22_.--Elder Theodore Curtis, having previously been arraigned
before a magistrate, and bound over in the sum of forty pounds, for
"blasphemy," _i. e_., preaching the Gospel, appeared at the court of
Sessions, at Gloucester, England, and after remaining five days [in
prison], was informed on inquiry, that no bill was found against him,
and he was suffered to go at large again after paying one pound and one
shilling cost. Thus we see that the same opposition to truth prevails
in other countries, as well as in this.

    _Extract from a Letter in the "Juliet Courier"--Describing the
    Prophet's Trial at Monmouth, and Affairs at Nauvoo_.

    Monmouth, June, 1841.

    My Dear Sir:--Before this reaches you, I have no doubt you will
    have heard of the trial of Joseph Smith, familiarly known as the
    {381} Mormon Prophet. As some misrepresentations have already gone
    abroad, in relation to Judge Douglas' decision, and the merits
    of the question decided by the judge; permit me to say, the only
    question decided, though many were debated, was the validity of the
    executive writ which had once been sent out, I think in September,
    1840, and a return on it that Mr. Smith could not be found. The
    same writ was issued in June, 1841. There can really be no great
    difficulty about this matter, under this state of facts.

    The judge acquitted himself handsomely, and silenced clamors that
    had been raised against the defendant.

    Since the trial I have been at Nauvoo, on the Mississippi, in
    Hancock county, Illinois; and have seen the manner in which things
    are conducted among the Mormons. In the first place, I cannot
    help noticing the plain hospitality of the Prophet, Smith, to all
    strangers visiting the town, aided as he is, in making the stranger
    comfortable by his excellent wife, a woman of superior ability. The
    people of the town appear to be honest and industrious, engaged
    in their usual vocations of building up a town, and making all
    things around them comfortable. On Sunday I attended one of their
    meetings, in front of the Temple now building, and one of the
    largest buildings in the state. There could not have been less
    than 2,500 people present, and as well appearing as any number
    that could be found in this or any state. Mr. Smith preached in
    the morning, and one could have readily learned, then, the magic
    by which he has built up this society, because, as we say in
    Illinois, "they believe in him," and in his honesty. It has been
    a matter of astonishment to me, after seeing the Prophet, as he
    is called, Elder Rigdon, and many other gentlemanly men anyone
    may see at Nauvoo, who will visit there--why it is, that so many
    professing Christianity, and so many professing to reverence the
    sacred principles of our Constitution (which gives free religious
    toleration to all), have slandered, and persecuted this sect of
    Christians.

_Saturday, 26_.--Elder Young and company arrived on the steamer
_Mermaid_, at the mouth of the Ohio river.

_Thursday, July 1_.--Elders Young, Kimball, and Taylor arrived at
Nauvoo, after an interesting mission to England. The accounts of their
missions are highly satisfactory.

During a heavy thunderstorm at Derby, England, hundreds of small fish
and frogs descended, and were picked up alive by the people.

{382} _Saturday, 3_.--The following is an extract from the

    _Legion Minutes_:

    The second regiment, first cohort, consisting of four companies,
    was organized, and Captain George Coulson was elected colonel,
    Josiah Ells lieutenant-colonel, and Hyrum Kimball major. On the
    same day, the third regiment, second cohort, consisting of four
    companies, was organized; Samuel Bent was elected colonel, George
    Morey, lieutenant-colonel, and William Niswanger, major; and the
    Legion was called out to celebrate our National Independence (the
    4th being Sunday), and was reviewed by Lieutenant-General Joseph
    Smith, who made an eloquent and patriotic speech to the troops, and
    strongly testified of his regard for our national welfare, and his
    willingness to lay down his life in defense of his country, and
    closed with these remarkable words, "I would ask no greater boon,
    than to lay down my life for my country."

An elaborate dinner was got up in the grove, of which I partook, in
company with the officers of the Legion, President Rigdon and many
others, with their ladies.

Elder Willard Richards left his family with his sisters at Richmond,
Massachusetts, and started for Nauvoo.

Elder Orson Pratt has published in New York an edition of his History
of the Coming Forth of the Book of Mormon, first printed in Edinburgh.

    _Revelation given to Joseph Smith, in the house of Brigham Young,
    in Nauvoo City, July 9, 1841_. [1]

    Dear and well beloved Brother Brigham Young, verily thus saith the
    Lord unto you, my servant Brigham, it is no more required at your
    hands to leave your family as in times past, for your offering is
    acceptable to me; I have seen your labor and toil in journeyings
    for my name. I therefore command you to send my word abroad, and
    take special care of your family from this time, henceforth and
    forever. Amen.

_Monday, 12_.--Elder William Clayton was appointed clerk of the High
Council of Iowa, and John Patton recorder of baptisms for the dead in
Iowa.

At the urgent solicitations of the brethren at Zarahemla, {383} I had
consented, at a previous date, that they might baptize for the dead on
the Iowa side of the river.

[Sidenote: Liquor Selling Licensed in Nauvoo.]

I was in the City Council, and moved that any person in the City of
Nauvoo be at liberty to sell vinous liquors in any quantity, subject to
the city ordinances.

_Tuesday, 13_.--Elder George A. Smith returned from his mission in
England.

A treaty was signed between Turkey, Russia, England, France, Austria,
and Prussia, whereby the Dardanelles are closed to all foreign ships of
war, as long as the Ottoman Porte enjoys peace.

[Sidenote: Manna Rain in Aleppo.]

_Wednesday, 14_.--The following is translated from the Arabic, in the
_Malta Times_--"Aleppo, 3rd May. A great famine has happened in Aleppo,
Malitia, and Karbat, insomuch that many people died with hunger, and
others sold their sons and daughters to get bread to eat. But the
Almighty God rained upon them seed (manna), and fed them withal." "Of
the veracity of these words," adds the _Malta Times_, "extracted from
an Arabic letter, we are perfectly satisfied. The seed alluded to is
known in Malta, being nearly like 'hab' or 'dazz,' and which being kept
a little while becomes white, like 'semola' (very fine wheaten flour)."

Immense quantities of locusts have appeared in Spain this year,
devouring everything in their way; and a shower of flesh and blood is
reported in the southern part of the United States.

[Sidenote: Press Falsehoods.]

_Thursday, 15_.--Many of the newspapers are publishing lies about me
by the wholesale; should I attempt to enumerate them, I could write
nothing else; suffice it to say, every falsehood wicked men can invent,
assisted by their father the devil, is trumpeted to the world as sound
doctrine, which proves the words of Jesus, "They have persecuted me,
they will persecute you also."

{384} I spent considerable part of the day with several of the Twelve
Apostles.

    _Letter of Elder Orson Hyde to President Smith--Detailing Events
    while en Route to Jerusalem_.

    Ratisbon On The Danube, July 17, 1841.

    Dear Brother Joseph, and all whom it may concern: With pleasure I
    take my pen to write to you at this time, hoping this communication
    may find you as it leaves me, in good health and enjoying a
    comfortable measure of the Holy Spirit.

    On the twentieth of June last, I left London for Rotterdam in
    Holland, after writing a lengthy epistle to you, and also the copy
    of a letter addressed to the Rev. Dr. S. Hirschell, President Rabbi
    of the Hebrews in London; which I hope you have received ere this;
    the work of the Lord is steadily advancing in London under the
    efficient and zealous labors of our worthy brother, Elder Lorenzo
    Snow.

    The fine steamer _Batavier_ brought me safely over the billows of a
    tremendous rough sea in about thirty hours. Never did I suffer more
    from sea sickness, than during this short voyage; but it was soon
    over, and we landed safely in Rotterdam. I took my lodgings at the
    London Hotel, at two florins per diem, about three shillings and
    five pence sterling, or seventy-five cents. Here I called on the
    Hebrew Rabbi, and proposed certain questions to him; but as he did
    not understand a word of English, it was hard for me to enter into
    particulars with him; I asked, him, however, whether he expected
    his Messiah to come directly from heaven, or whether he expected
    Him to be born of a woman on earth? He replied that he expected Him
    to be born of a woman of the seed and lineage of David. At what
    period do you look for this event? Answer. "We have been looking
    a long time, and are now living in constant expectation of His
    coming." Do you believe in the restitution of your nation to the
    land of your fathers, called the land of _promise_? "We hope it
    will be so," was the reply. He then added, "We believe that many
    Jews will return to Jerusalem and rebuild the city--rear a temple
    to the name of the Most High, and restore our ancient worship;
    Jerusalem shall be the capital of our nation--the centre of our
    union and the standard and ensign of our national existence. But we
    do not believe that all the Jews will go there, for the place is
    not large enough to contain them. They are now gathering there,"
    continued he, "almost continually." I told him I had written an
    address to the Hebrews, and was about procuring its publication
    in his own language (Dutch), and when completed I would leave him
    a copy. He thanked {385} me for this token of respect, and I bade
    him adieu. I soon obtained the publication of five hundred copies
    of the address, and left one at the house of the Rabbi--he being
    absent from home, I did not see him.

    After remaining here about one week, I took the coach for
    Amsterdam, distance seven hours or about thirty English miles.
    Rotterdam is a fine town of about eighty thousand inhabitants. The
    cleanliness of its streets, the antique order of its architecture,
    the extreme height of its buildings, the numerous shade trees
    with which it is beautified, and the great number of canals,
    through almost every part of the town, filled with ships of
    various sizes from different parts of the world; all these, with
    many other things not mentioned, contributed to give this place a
    peculiarity resembled no where else in the course of my travels,
    except in Amsterdam. Most of the business men here speak a little
    English--some speak it very well.

    In ascending the waters of the Rhine from the sea to Rotterdam,
    the numerous windmills which I beheld in constant operation, led
    me to think, almost, that all Europe came here for their grinding.
    But I ascertained that they were grinding for distilleries, where
    the floods of gin are made, which not only deluge our beloved
    country, with fatal consequences, but many others. Gin is one of
    the principal articles of exportation from this country.

    In going to Amsterdam, I passed through a very beautiful town
    called "The Hague," the residence of the King of Holland. I saw
    his palace, which was guarded by soldiers both horse and foot. For
    grandeur it bore here a faint resemblance to Buckingham Palace,
    in London. But the beautiful parks and picturesque scenery in and
    about the Hague, I have never seen equalled in any country.

    I remained in Amsterdam only one night and a part of two days. I
    called on the President Rabbi here, but he was gone from home. I
    left at his house a large number of the addresses for himself and
    his people, and took coach for Arnhem on the Rhine. Took boat the
    same evening for Mainz. Traveling by coach and steam is rather
    cheaper in this country than in the United States. We were three
    days in going up the river to Mainz.

    Holland and the lower part of Prussia are very low, flat countries.
    The French and German languages are spoken all along the Rhine; but
    little or no English. The Rhine is about like the Ohio for size,
    near its mouth where it empties into the Mississippi. Its waters
    resemble the Mississippi waters, dark and muddy. The scenery and
    landscapes along this river have been endowed with art and nature's
    choicest gifts.

    I have been made acquainted with Europe in America, by books, to
    a certain extent; yet now my eyes behold! It is impossible for
    a written {386} description of a stranger's beauty to leave the
    same impression upon the mind, as is made by an ocular view of
    the lovely object. This is the difference between reading of and
    seeing the countries of Europe. From Mainz I came to Frankfort
    on the Maine by railroad--distance seven hours. From Frankfort I
    came to this place--distance about thirty hours, where Napoleon
    gained a celebrated victory over the Prussians and Austrians. The
    very ground on which I now write this letter was covered by about
    sixty thousand slain in that battle. It is called the battle of
    Ackeynaeal.

    It was my intention to have gone directly down the Danube to
    Constantinople, but having neglected to get my passport vised
    by the Austrian Ambassador at Frankfort, I had to forward it to
    the Austrian Ambassador at Munich and procure his permission,
    signature and seal before I could enter the Austrian dominions.
    This detained me five days, during which time I conceived the idea
    of sitting down and learning the German language scientifically.
    I became acquainted with a lady here who speaks French and German
    to admiration, and she was very anxious to speak the English--she
    proposed giving me instruction in the German, if I would instruct
    her in English. I accepted her proposal. I have been engaged
    eight days in this task. I have read one book through and part of
    another, and translated and written considerable. I can speak and
    write considerable German already, and the lady tells me that I
    make astonishing progress. From the past experience I know that
    the keen edge of any work translated by a stranger, in whose heart
    the spirit of the matter does not dwell, is lost--the life and
    animation thereof die away into a cold monotony, and it becomes
    almost entirely another thing. This step is according to the best
    light I can get, and hope and trust that it is according to the
    mind of the Lord. The people will hardly believe but that I have
    spoken German before; but I tell them _nein_ (no). The German is
    spoken in Prussia, Bavaria, and all the states of Germany, Austria,
    the south of Russia, and in fine, more or less all over Europe.
    It appears to me, therefore, that some person of some little
    experience ought to know this language so as to translate himself,
    without being dependent on strangers. If I am wrong in my movement
    pray that the Spirit of the Lord may direct me aright. If I am
    right, pray that heaven may speedily give me this language.

    It is very sickly in Constantinople and Syria and Alexandria at
    present. I would rather, therefore, wait until cool weather before
    I go there. I might have written most of this letter in German, but
    as you would more readily understand it in English, I have written
    it in English.

    With pleasure I leave the historical part of my letter to touch
    a softer note, and give vent to the feelings of my heart. I hope
    and trust that {387} the cause which you so fearlessly advocate,
    is rolling forth in America, with that firm and steady motion
    which characterizes the work of Jehovah. The enemies which we are
    forced to encounter are numerous, strong, shrewd and cunning.
    Their leader transfuses into them his own spirit, and brings them
    into close alliance with the numerous hosts of precious immortals
    who have been earlier taken captives by the haughty tyrant, and
    sacrificed upon the altar of iniquity, transgression and sin. May
    it please our Father in heaven to throw around thee his protecting
    arms, to place beneath thee almighty strength ever buoy thy head
    above the raging waves of tribulation, through which the chart
    of destiny has evidently marked thy course. I am happy in the
    enjoyment of the distinguished consideration with which heaven's
    favor alone has endowed me, of bearing with you some humble part
    in laying the foundation of the glorious kingdom of Messiah, which
    is destined in its onward course to break in pieces and destroy
    all others, and stand for ever. The friendship and good will which
    are breathed towards me through all your letters, are received as
    the legacy which noble minds and generous hearts are ever anxious
    to bequeath. They soften the hard and rugged path in which heaven
    has directed my course. They are buoyancy in depression--joy in
    sorrow; and when the dark clouds of despondency are gathering thick
    around the mental horizon, like kind angels from the fountain of
    mercy, they dispel the gloom, dry the tear of sorrow, and pour
    humanity's healing balm into my grieved and sorrowful heart. Be
    assured, therefore, Brother Joseph, that effusions from the altar
    of a grateful heart, are smoking to heaven daily in thy behalf; and
    not only in thine, but in behalf of all Zion's suffering sons and
    daughters. Though now far separated from you, and also from her,
    who, with me, has suffered the chilling blasts of adversity, yet
    hope lingers in this bosom, brightened almost into certainty by the
    implicit confidence reposed in the virtue of that call which was
    born on the gentle breeze of the Spirit of God, through the dark
    shades of midnight gloom, till it found a mansion in my anxious and
    inquiring heart, that my feet shall once more press the American
    soil; and under the shade of her streaming banner, embrace again
    the friends I love.

    I never knew that I was in reality an American, until I walked out
    one fine morning in Rotterdam along the wharf where many ships lay
    in the waters of the Rhine. Suddenly my eye caught a broad pendant
    floating in a gentle breeze over the stern of a fine ship at mizzen
    half mast; and when I saw the wide spread eagle perched on her
    banner with the stripes and stars under which our fathers were led
    to conquest and victory, my heart leaped into my mouth, a flood
    of tears burst from my eyes, and before reflection could mature a
    sentence, my mouth involuntarily gave birth to these words, "I am
    an American." To see the {388} flag of one's country in a strange
    land, and floating upon strange waters, produces feelings which
    none can know except those who experience them. I can now say that
    I am an American. While at home the warmth and fire of the American
    spirit lay in silent slumber in my bosom; but the winds of foreign
    climes have fanned it into a flame.

    I have seen some of the finest specimens of painting and
    sculpture of both ancient and modern times. The vast varieties of
    curiosities, also, from every country on the globe, together with
    every novelty that genius could invent or imagination conceive,
    which I have been compelled to witness in the course of my travels,
    would be too heavy a tax upon my time to describe, and upon your
    patience to read. I have witnessed the wealth and splendor of
    many of the towns in Europe--have gazed with admiration upon
    the widely-extended plains, her lofty mountains, her mouldering
    castles, and her extensive vineyards: for at this season nature is
    clad in her bridal robes, and smiles under the benign jurisprudence
    of her Author. I have also listened to the blandishments, gazed
    upon the pride and fashion of a world grown old in luxury and
    refinement, viewed the pageantry of kings, queens, lords, and
    nobles; and am now where military honor, and princely dignity,
    must bow at the shrine of clerical superiority. In fine, my mind
    has become cloyed with novelty, pomp, and show; and turns with
    disgust from the glare of fashion to commune with itself in retired
    meditation.

    Were it consistent with the will of Deity, and consonant with the
    convictions of my own bosom, most gladly would I retreat from
    the oppressing heat of public life, and seek repose in the cool
    and refreshing shades of domestic endearments, and bask in the
    affections of my own little family circle. But the will of God be
    done! Can the Messiah's kingdom but be advanced through my toil,
    privation, and excessive labors, and at last sanctify my work
    through the effusion of my blood! I yield, O Lord! I yield to thy
    righteous mandate! Imploring help from thee in the hour of trial,
    and strength in the day of weakness to faithfully endure until my
    immortal spirit shall be driven from its earthly mansion to find a
    refuge in the bosom of its God.

    If the friends in America shall be edified in reading this letter
    from Brother Hyde, I hope they will remember one thing; and that is
    this, that he hopes he has a wife and two children living there;
    but the distance is so great between him and them, that his arm is
    not long enough to administer to their wants. I have said enough.
    Lord, bless my wife and children, and the hand that ministers good
    to them, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen. Adieu for the present.

    Good rest on all the Saints throughout the world.

    Orson Hyde.

{389} A violent and destructive hurricane swept over portions of
France, Germany, and Switzerland.

Death of Senator Little.

_Sunday, 18_.--This day was observed as a day of fasting and prayer by
the Saints in Nauvoo, that they might mourn with them that mourn, "and
weep with them that weep," on account of the death of Honorable Sidney
H. Little of the Senate, who was killed by jumping from a wagon last
Sunday, while his horse was unmanageable. Mr. Little was a patriot,
statesman, and lawyer.

Meeting was held in the grove, west of the Temple; Elders Sidney
Rigdon, John Taylor, and Geo. A. Smith preached.

_Monday, 19_.--Council of the Twelve, viz.--Brigham Young, Heber C.
Kimball, John Taylor, Orson Pratt, and George A. Smith met at Elder
Young's house, conversing with Lyman E. Johnson, who formerly belonged
to the quorum. President Rigdon and myself were with them part of the
time.

[Sidenote: General Funeral Sermon.]

_Sunday, 25_.--Attended meeting in the grove. Elders Orson Pratt and
George A. Smith preached in the forenoon. In the afternoon Elder Sidney
Rigdon preached a general funeral sermon, designed to comfort and
instruct the Saints, especially those who had been called to mourn the
loss of relatives and friends. I followed him, illustrating the subject
of the resurrection by some familiar figures.

Elder George A. Smith married Bathsheba W. Bigler. Don Carlos Smith
performed the ceremony, which was the last official act of his life, he
being very feeble at the time.

Brother William Yokum had his leg amputated by Dr. John F. Weld, who
operated free of charge; he was wounded in the massacre at Haun's Mill,
October 30th, 1838, and had lain on his back ever since; and now it was
found the only chance to save his life was to have his leg {390} cut
off. He was also shot through the head at the same massacre.

_Wednesday, 28_.--The Jewish quarter of Smyrna was burned. Three
thousand houses and eight synagogues were destroyed.

[Sidenote: The Prophet's Account of the Mission of the Twelve.]

_Sunday, August 1_.--All the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles who were
expected here this season, with the exception of Elders Willard
Richards and Wilford Woodruff, have arrived. We have listened to the
accounts which they give of their success, and the prosperity of
the work of the Lord In Great Britain with pleasure. They certainly
have been the instruments in the hands of God of accomplishing much,
and must have the satisfaction of knowing that they have done their
duty. Perhaps no men ever undertook such an important mission under
such peculiarly distressing and unpropitious circumstances. Most of
them when they left this place, nearly two years ago, were worn down
with sickness and disease, or were taken sick on the road. Several of
their families were also afflicted and needed their aid and support.
But knowing that they had been called by the God of Heaven to preach
the Gospel to other nations, they conferred not with flesh and blood,
but obedient to the heavenly mandate, without purse or scrip, they
commenced a journey of five thousand miles entirely dependent on the
providence of that God who had called them to such a holy calling.
While journeying to the sea board they were brought into many trying
circumstances; after a short recovery from severe sickness, they
would be taken with a relapse, and have to stop among strangers,
without money and without friends. Their lives were several times
despaired of, and they have taken each other by the hand, expecting it
would be the last time they should behold one another in the flesh.
However, notwithstanding their afflictions and trials, the Lord always
interposed in their behalf, and did not suffer them to sink {391} in
the arms of death. Some way or other was made for their escape--friends
rose up when they most needed them, and relieved their necessities;
and thus they were enabled to pursue their journey and rejoice in the
Holy One of Israel. They, truly, "went forth weeping, bearing precious
seed," but have "returned with rejoicing, bearing their sheaves with
them."

The minds of thousands are already prepared to hear of the sacking
of cities--the marching and countermarching of armies--the burning
of towns and villages--the flight of citizens--the rising of the
Indians--the commotion in Illinois--the distress in Iowa--the
consternation and flight of the Missourians, the exploits of mighty
chieftains, &c.--on account of the fooleries and lies which have been
trumpeted forth from the press in the United States.

_Thursday, 5_.--Letters from London, state that there are a
number--more or less--baptized every week.

There was a general election of members of Parliament last month.
Serious riots occurred in different parts of the kingdom between the
Whigs and Tories.

    _Letter of William Smith to President Smith--Land Transactions_.

    Chester County, Pennsylvania,

    August 5th, 1841.

    Brother Joseph:--I expect to leave here for the Jersey country next
    week. Doctor Galland left for Nauvoo last week. In the Hotchkiss
    business, Hyrum requested me to do all I could. Brother James
    Ivins has received orders on you from Doctor Galland to the amount
    of twenty-five hundred dollars. The property that he has given
    these orders for, is well worth the money. I expect Mr. Hotchkiss
    in new Jersey in a few days to receive this property, which is
    Cook's Mills Tavern stand, attached to six acres of ground with
    all the appurtenances. Some of the Jersey people think it worth
    three thousand dollars. Now the question is, shall I let Mr.
    Hotchkiss have this property for less than twenty-five hundred,
    since that is the price you will have to pay at Nauvoo. Why I ask
    this {392} question is--I have understood that Hotchkiss has said
    that he would not allow over twenty-two hundred dollars. I got
    hold of another small piece of land, worth five hundred; and if
    Hotchkiss will take all at a fair price, I shall be enabled to
    settle the amount of three thousand dollars soon. Please write me
    an answer to the above question. The cause in these eastern lands
    is flourishing, and we want more laborers; fifty doors opened for
    preaching where there is but one laborer. I wish you would send us
    help.

    Yours in the bonds of the covenant,

    William Smith.

Footnotes:

1. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxvi.

{393}



CHAPTER XXIII.

The Death of Don Carlos Smith--His Life and Labors--Special Conference
at Nauvoo.

[Sidenote: The Death of Don Carlos Smith.]

_Saturday, August 7_.--My youngest brother, Don Carlos Smith, died
at his residence in Nauvoo this morning, at twenty minutes past two
o'clock, in the 26th year of his age. He was born 25th March, 1816,
was one of the first to receive my testimony, and was ordained to the
Priesthood when only 14 years of age. The evening after the plates of
the Book of Mormon were shown to the eight witnesses, a meeting was
held, when all the witnesses, as also Don Carlos bore testimony to
the truth of the latter-day dispensation. He accompanied father to
visit grandfather, Asael Smith, and relatives in St. Lawrence county,
New York, in August, 1830. During that mission he convinced Solomon
Humphrey, a licentiate of the Baptist order, of the truth of the work.
He was one of the 24 Elders who laid the corner stones of the Kirtland
Temple. In the fall of 1833, he entered the office of Oliver Cowdery
to learn the art of printing. On the 30th July, 1835, he married
Agnes Coolbrith, in Kirtland, Ohio. On the 15th January, 1836, he was
ordained President of the High Priests' quorum. He took a mission with
Wilber Denton in the spring and summer of 1836, in Pennsylvania and New
York. On the commencement of the publication of the _Elders' Journal_
in Kirtland, he took the control of the establishment until the
office was destroyed by fire in December, 1837, when, in consequence
of persecution, he moved his family to {394} New Portage. Early in
the spring of 1838 he took a mission through the states of Virginia,
Pennsylvania and Ohio, and raised means to assist his father; and
immediately after his return he started to Missouri with his family,
in company with father and family, and purchased a farm in Daviess
county. On the 26th September he started on a mission to the states
of Tennessee and Kentucky, to collect means to buy out the claims
and property of the mobbers in Daviess county, Missouri. During his
absence, his wife and two little children were driven by the mob from
his habitation, and she was compelled to carry her children three
miles, through snow three inches deep, and wade through Grand river,
which was waist deep, during the inclement weather. He returned about
the 25th of December, after a very tedious mission, having traveled
1,500 miles, 650 of which were on foot.

I extract the following from his journal--

    On the 30th of September, 1838, in company with George A. Smith,
    Lorenzo D. Barnes, and Harrison Sagers, I went on board the
    _Kansas_ (which had one wheel broken); the Missouri river was
    very low, and full of snags and sand bars. General Samuel Lucas
    and Moses Wilson, of Jackson county, Colonel Thompson, from Platt
    Purchase, and many others of the active mobbers were on board,
    as also General David R. Atchison. On touching at De Witt, on
    1st October, for wood, we found about seventy of the brethren,
    with their families, surrounded by an armed mob of upwards of
    two hundred. The women and children there were much frightened,
    expecting it was a boat loaded with mobbers. We would have stopped
    and assisted them, but being unarmed, we thought it best to
    fulfill our mission. From this onward the "Mormons" were the only
    subject of conversation, and nothing was heard but the most bitter
    imprecations against them. General Wilson related many of his deeds
    of noble daring in the Jackson mob, one of which was the following:
    "I went, in company with forty others, to the house of Hiram Page,
    a Mormon, in Jackson county. We got logs and broke in every door
    and window at the same instant; and pointing our rifles at the
    family, we told them, we would be d--d if we didn't shoot every
    one of them, if Page didn't come out. At that, a tall woman made
    her appearance, with a child in her arms. I told the boys she was
    too d--d tall. In a moment the boys stripped her, and found it was
    Page. I told them {395} to give him a d--d good one. We gave him
    sixty or seventy blows with hickory withes which we had prepared.
    Then after pulling the roof off the house, we went to the next
    d--d Mormon's house, and whipped him in like manner. We continued
    until we whipped ten or fifteen of the d--d Mormons, and demolished
    their houses that night. If the Carroll boys would do that way they
    might conquer; but it is no use to think of driving them without
    four or five to one. I wish I could stay, I would help drive the
    d--d Mormons to hell, Old Joe, and all the rest." At this I looked
    the General sternly in the face, and told him, that he was neither
    a republican nor a gentleman, but a savage, without a single
    principle of honor, or humanity. "If," said I, "the 'Mormons' have
    broken the law, let it be strictly executed against them; but such
    anti-republican, and unconstitutional acts as these, related by
    you, are beneath the brutes." We were upon the hurricane deck, and
    a large company present were listening to the conversation. While
    I was speaking, Wilson placed his hand upon his pistol, which was
    belted under the skirt of his coat; but Cousin George stood by
    his side, watching every move of his hand, and would have knocked
    him into the river instantly, had he attempted to draw a deadly
    weapon. But General Atchison saved him the trouble, by saying,
    "I'll be d--d to hell if Smith ain't right." At this, Wilson left
    the company crest-fallen. In the course of the conversation, Wilson
    said that the best plan was to rush into the Mormon settlements,
    murder the men, make slaves of the children, take possession of the
    property, and use the women as they pleased.

    A gentleman, present from Baltimore, Maryland, said he never was
    among such a pack of d--d savages before: he had passed through
    Far West, and saw nothing among the "Mormons" but good order. Then
    drawing his pistols, he discharged them, and re-loading, said, "If
    God spares my life till I get out of Upper Missouri, I will never
    be found associating with such devils again."

    Shortly after this we were invited to preach on board, Elder Barnes
    and I preached. The rest of the way we were treated more civilly;
    but being deck passengers, and having very little money, we
    suffered much for food.

    We continued our journey together through every species of hardship
    and fatigue, until the 11th of October, when Elders Barnes and
    Harrison Sagers left us at Paducah, after our giving them all the
    money we had, they starting up the Ohio river, and we to visit the
    churches in west Tennessee and Kentucky. Soon after this, Julian
    Moses gave us a five-franc piece, and bade us farewell.

    We soon found that the mob spirit was in Kentucky, as well as in
    Missouri; we preached in a small branch of the Church in Calloway
    county, and stayed at the house of Sister Selah Parker, which was
    {396} surrounded in the night by about twenty armed men, led by
    John McCartney, a Campbellite priest, who had sworn to kill the
    first "Mormon" Elder who should dare to preach in that place.
    The family were very much terrified. After trying the doors, the
    mobbers finally went away. We visited a number of small branches in
    Tennessee; the brethren generally arranged to be on hand with their
    money, or lands for exchange in the spring. Brother Samuel West
    gave us twenty-eight dollars to help defray our traveling expenses.
    We also received acts of kindness from others, which will never be
    forgotten.

    About this time our minds were seized with an awful
    foreboding--horror seemed to have laid his grasp upon us--we lay
    awake night after night for we could not sleep. Our forebodings
    increased, and we felt sure that all was not right; yet we
    continued preaching until the Lord showed us that the Saints would
    be driven from Missouri. We then started home, and, on arriving
    at Wyatt's Mills, we were told that if we preached there it would
    cost us our lives. We had given out an appointment at the house of
    Mrs. Foster, a wealthy widow. She also advised us to give it up;
    but, as she had no fears for herself, her property or family, we
    concluded to fill our appointment. The hour of meeting came, and
    many attended. George A. preached about an hour: during which time
    Captain Fitch came in at the head of twelve other mobbers, who had
    large hickory clubs, and they sat down with their hats on. When
    George A. took his seat, I arose and addressed them for an hour and
    a half, during which time, I told them that I was a patriot--that
    I was free--that I loved my country--that I loved liberty--that I
    despised both mobs and mobbers--that no gentleman, or Christian at
    heart would ever be guilty of such things, or countenance them.
    Whereupon the mob pulled off their hats, laid down their clubs, and
    listened with almost breathless attention.

    After meeting Mr. Fitch came to us and said that he was ashamed of
    his conduct, and would never do the like again; that he had been
    misinformed about us by some religious bigots, and begged of us to
    forgive him, which we did.

    We continued our journey to Columbus, Hickman county, Kentucky, and
    put up with Captain Robinson, formerly an officer in the army, who
    treated us very kindly, assuring us that we were welcome to stay
    at his house until a boat should come, if it were three months.
    We stayed nine days, during which a company of thirteen hundred
    Cherokee Indians were ferried over the river.

    We went on board the steamer _Louisville_, and had to pay all our
    money for a deck passage. About ninety miles from St. Louis our
    boat got aground, where it lay three days. We had nothing to eat
    but a little parched corn. We then went on board of a little boat,
    _The Return_, {397} which landed us in St. Louis the next morning.
    Here we found Elder Orson Pratt, and learned that Joseph was a
    prisoner with many others, and that David Patten was killed, and of
    the sufferings of the Saints, which filled our hearts with sorrow.

    The next morning we started on foot for home; at Huntsville, about
    200 miles, we stopped at the house of George Lyman to rest. George
    A.'s feet had now become very sore from walking.

    We had not been long in Huntsville before the mob made a rally to
    use us up, as they said, with the rest of the Smiths: and, at the
    earnest request of our friends, we thought best to push on, and
    started about ten at night. The wind was in our faces, the ground
    slippery, and the night very dark; nevertheless we proceeded on
    our journey. Traveling twenty-two miles, we came to the Chariton
    river, which we found frozen over, but the ice too weak to bear us,
    and the boat on the west side of the river. We went to the next
    ferry, but finding there was no boat, and knowing that in the next
    neighborhood a man's brains were beaten out for being a "Mormon,"
    we returned to the first ferry, and tried by hallowing to raise
    the ferryman on the opposite side of the river, but were not able
    to awake him. We were almost benumbed with the cold, and to warm
    ourselves we commenced scuffling and jumping: we then beat our feet
    upon the logs and stumps, in order to start a circulation of blood;
    but at last George A. became so cold and sleepy, that he could
    not stand it any longer, and lay down. I told him he was freezing
    to death; I rolled him on the ground, pounded and thumped him; I
    then cut a stick and said I would thrash him. At this he got up,
    and undertook to thrash me; this stirred his blood a little, but
    he soon lay down again. By this time the ferryman came over, and
    set us across the river, where we warmed ourselves a little, and
    pursued our journey until about breakfast time, when we stopped at
    the house of a man, who we afterwards learned was a leader of the
    mob at Haun's Mill massacre. The next morning we started without
    breakfast. Our route lay through a wild prairie, where there was
    but very little track, and only one house in forty miles. The
    northwest wind blew fiercely in our faces, and the ground was so
    slippery that we could scarcely keep our feet, and when the night
    came on, to add to our perplexity, we lost our way; soon after
    which, I became so cold that it was with great difficulty I could
    keep from freezing. We also became extremely thirsty; however, we
    found a remedy for this by cutting through ice three inches thick
    with a penknife. While we were drinking, we heard a cowbell; this
    caused our hearts to leap for joy, and we arose and steered our
    coarse towards the sound. We soon entered Tenny's Grove, which
    sheltered us from the wind, and we felt more comfortable. In a
    short time we came to the house of Whitford G. Wilson, where we
    were made {398} welcome and kindly entertained. We lay down to rest
    about two o'clock in the morning, after having traveled one hundred
    and ten miles in two days and two nights. After breakfast I set out
    for Far West, leaving George A. sick, with our hospitable friends.
    When I arrived on the evening of December 25th, I was fortunate
    enough to find my family alive, and in tolerable health, which
    was more than I could have expected, considering the scenes of
    persecution through which they had passed.

[Sidenote: The Visits of Don Carlos to Liberty Prison.]

Don Carlos visited us several times while we were in Liberty jail, and
brought our wives to see us, and some money and articles to relieve
our necessities. He took charge of father's family in his flight from
Missouri, and saw them removed to Quincy, Illinois.

[Sidenote: His Ministrations to the Sick.]

In June, 1839, he commenced making preparations for printing the _Times
and Seasons_. The press and type had been resurrected by Elias Smith,
Hyrum Clark, and others, from its grave in Dawson's yard, Far West,
where it was buried for safety the night that General Lucas surrounded
the city with the mob militia. The form for a number of the _Elders'
Journal_ was buried with the ink on it. The types were considerably
injured by the damp; it was therefore necessary to get them into use
as soon as possible, and in order to do this, Don Carlos was under
the necessity of cleaning out a cellar through which a spring was
constantly flowing, as the only place where he could put up the press.
Ebenezer Robinson and wife being sick, threw the entire burden on him.

As a great number of brethren lay sick in the town, on Tuesday, 23rd
July, 1839, I told Don Carlos and George A. Smith to go and visit all
the sick, exercise mighty faith, and administer to them in the name of
Jesus Christ, commanding the destroyer to depart, and the people to
arise and walk; and not leave a single person on the bed between my
house and Ebenezer Robinson's, two miles distant; they administered to
over sixty persons, many {399} of whom thought they would never sit up
again; but they were healed, arose from their beds, and gave glory to
God; some of them assisted in visiting and administering to others who
were sick.

Working in the damp cellar, and administering to the sick impaired his
health so that the first number of the _Times and Seasons_ was not
issued until November. He edited thirty-one numbers.

He was elected major in the Hancock county militia, and on the death of
Seymour Brunson, was made lieutenant-colonel.

He was elected on 1st February, 1841, a member of the City Council of
Nauvoo, and took the necessary oath on 3rd February, and on the fourth
he was elected brigadier-general of the second cohort of the Nauvoo
Legion.

[Sidenote: Personal Appearance of Don Carlos Smith.]

He was six feet four inches high, was very straight and well made, had
light hair, and was very strong and active. His usual weight when in
health was 200 pounds. He was universally beloved by the Saints.

He left three daughters, namely, Agnes C., Sophronia C., and Josephine
D.

[Sidenote: The Iowa Stake of Zion.]

President John Smith was unanimously acknowledged as the president of
the stake in Iowa, David Pettigrew, M. C. Nickerson, counselors. Elias
Smith was sustained as Bishop and Joseph B. Noble and Joseph Mecham as
his counselors.

A conference of the Church was held at Zarahemla, and the branches in
Iowa, so far as represented, consisted of 750 members.

Shocks of an earthquake felt at several places in Spain.

_Sunday, 8_.--A water-spout destroyed twenty houses of Portpatrick,
Scotland.

The funeral of Brother Don Carlos was attended by a vast concourse of
friends and relatives; he was buried with military honors.

{400} The Zarahemla conference appointed George W. Gee, Church
Recorder, and was addressed by Elders John Taylor and George A. Smith,
on building the Temple, and on temperance.

_Monday, 9_.--The steamboat _Erie_ was burned on Lake Erie, thirty
miles from Buffalo, and eight from the shore, two hundred persons on
board, of whom one hundred and seventy-five perished.

[Sidenote: New Mission Movement Planned.]

_Tuesday, 10_--I spent the day in council with Brigham Young, Heber
C. Kimball, John Taylor, Orson Pratt, and George A. Smith, and
appointed a special conference for the 16th instant. I directed them
to send missionaries to New Orleans; Charleston, South Carolina;
Salem, Massachusetts; Baltimore, Maryland; and Washington, District
of Columbia. I also requested the Twelve to take the burthen of the
business of the Church in Nauvoo, and especially as pertaining to the
selling of Church lands.

The department of English literature and mathematics, of the University
of the City of Nauvoo, is in operation under the tuition of Professor
Orson Pratt.

    _General Orders, Nauvoo Legion_.

    Headquarters, Nauvoo Legion,

    City Of Nauvoo, Aug. 10, 1841.

    It becomes our painful duty to officially notify the troops
    of our command of the untimely decease of that noble chief,
    Brigadier-General Don Carlos Smith--he fell, but not in battle--he
    perished, but not by the weapons of war--at his burial you paid him
    honor, but he is gathered to his fathers to receive greater honor.

    In consequence of this afflicting dispensation of Divine
    Providence, the commissioned officers of the staff and line will
    wear crape on the left arm for thirty days. The commissioned
    officers of the second cohort will convene at General Smith's
    office, on Saturday, the 4th day of September, at 10 o'clock a. m.,
    for the purpose of electing a brigadier-general, at which time and
    place the court of appeals will sit.

    The legion will assemble at the usual place of rendezvous, in
    the city of Nauvoo, on Saturday, the 11th day of September, at
    10 o'clock a. m., for the purpose of general parade. The militia
    officers of the county of {401} Hancock, Illinois; and the county
    of Lee, Iowa, are respectfully invited to attend. The adjutants
    of regiments will form their respective regiments at 9 o'clock
    and at 10 o'clock; the adjutant of the Legion will form the line
    by regiments, and not by companies as heretofore. A special
    court-martial will convene at the usual place, on Saturday, the
    28th day of August, at 10 o'clock a. m., for the transaction of
    business.

    Joseph Smith, Lieutenant-General.

A shower of meteoric stones fell at Iwan in Hungary.

[Sidenote: Depression of the Times.]

Letters from various parts of England and Scotland show that numbers
are daily added to the Church; while shipwrecks, floods, houses
and workshops falling, great and destructive fires, sudden deaths,
banks breaking, men's hearts failing them for fear, shop-keepers and
manufacturers failing, because no man buyeth their merchandise, many
accidents on the railways, etc., betoken the coming of the Son of Man.

[Sidenote: Visit of the Sac and Fox Indians to Nauvoo.]

_Thursday, 12_.--A considerable number of the Sac and Fox Indians
have been for several days encamped in the neighborhood of Montrose.
The ferryman brought over a great number on the ferryboat and two
flat boats for the purpose of visiting me. The military band and a
detachment of Invincibles [part of the Legion] were on shore ready
to receive and escort them to the grove, but they refused to come on
shore until I went down. I accordingly went down, and met Keokuk,
Kis-ku-kosh, Appenoose, and about one hundred chiefs and braves of
those tribes, with their families. At the landing, I was introduced
by Brother Hyrum to them; and after salutations, I conducted them to
the meeting grounds in the grove, and instructed them in many things
which the Lord had revealed unto me concerning their fathers, and
the promises that were made concerning them in the Book of Mormon. I
advised them to cease killing each other and warring with other tribes;
also to keep peace with the whites; all of which was interpreted to
them.

Keokuk replied that he had a Book of Mormon at his {402} wigwam which I
had given him some years before. "I believe," said he, "you are a great
and good man; I look rough, but I also am a son of the Great Spirit. I
have heard your advice--we intend to quit fighting, and follow the good
talk you have given us."

After the conversation they were feasted on the green with good
food, dainties, and melons by the brethren; and they entertained the
spectators with a specimen of their dancing.

_Saturday, 14_.--Sir J. M. Brunel, the engineer, with fifty ladies and
gentlemen, made the first passage under the river Thames, England.

_Sunday, 15_.--My infant son, Don Carlos, died, aged 14 months, 2 days.

Conference met in Zarahemla, and was addressed by Elders Brigham Young
and George Miller on building the Temple in Nauvoo.

_Monday, 16_.--Elder Willard Richards arrived at Nauvoo this morning.

Ebenezer Robinson succeeded Brother Don Carlos as editor of the _Times
and Seasons_, with Elder Robert B. Thompson assistant editor.

    _Minutes of a Special Conference at Nauvoo--Important Action in
    Relation to the Twelve_.

    At a special conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
    Saints, held in the city of Nauvoo, August 16, 1841, Elder Brigham
    Young was unanimously appointed to preside over the conference, and
    Elias Smith and Lorenzo D. Barnes were appointed clerks.

    Singing by the choir; conference opened by prayer, by the president.

    The object of the conference was then presented by the president,
    who stated that President Joseph Smith (who was then absent on
    account of the death of his child) had called a special conference
    to transact certain items of business necessary to be done previous
    to the October conference--such as to select men of experience to
    send forth into the vineyard, take measures to assist emigrants
    who may arrive at the places of gathering, and prevent impositions
    being practiced upon them by unprincipled speculators. The speaker
    hoped that no one would view him and his brethren as aspiring,
    because they had come forward {403} to take part in the proceedings
    before the conference; he could assure the brethren that nothing
    could be further from his wishes, and those of his quorum, than
    to interfere with Church affairs in Zion and her stakes. He had
    been in the vineyard so long, he had become attached to foreign
    missions, and nothing could induce him to retire therefrom and
    attend to the affairs of the Church at home but a sense of duty,
    the requirements of heaven, or the revelations of God; to which
    he would always submit, be the consequence what it might; and the
    brethren of his quorum responded, Amen.

    A list of names of Elders and cities were read by the president,
    and a few were selected by nomination, and designated as follows:
    Voted that Elders Henry G. Sherwood go to New Orleans; Abraham O.
    Smoot to Charleston, South Carolina; Erastus Snow and Benjamin
    Winchester to Salem, Massachusetts; John Murdock to Baltimore,
    Maryland; and Samuel James to Washington, D. C.

    On motion of Vinson Knight, seconded by Samuel Bent, resolved: that
    the quorum of the Twelve select the individuals to go and preach in
    such places as they may judge expedient, and present the same to
    the conference, with a view of expediting the business of the day.

    The situation of the poor of Nauvoo City was then presented by
    Bishops Knight and Miller, and a collection taken for their benefit.

    After singing, conference adjourned until 2 o'clock p. m.

    All of the Twelve present at the conference went and visited
    President Joseph Smith to comfort him in his affliction.

    Conference assembled at 2 p. m., and was addressed by Elders
    Lorenzo D. Barnes and Henry G. Sherwood, concerning the spread of
    the Gospel and the building up of the kingdom of God in these last
    days.

    President Joseph Smith now arriving, proceeded to state to the
    conference at considerable length, the object of their present
    meeting, and, in addition to what President Young had stated in
    the morning, said that the time had come when the Twelve should be
    called upon to stand in their place next to the First Presidency,
    and attend to the settling of emigrants and the business of
    the Church at the stakes, and assist to bear off the kingdom
    victoriously to the nations, and as they had been faithful, and
    had borne the burden in the heat of the day, that it was right
    that they should have an opportunity of providing something for
    themselves and families, and at the same time relieve him, so that
    he might attend to the business of translating.

    Moved, seconded and carried, that the conference approve of the
    instructions of President Smith in relation to the Twelve, and that
    they proceed accordingly to attend to the duties of their office.

    Moved, seconded and carried unanimously, that every individual who
    {404} shall hereafter be found trying to influence any emigrants
    belonging to the Church, either to buy of them (except provisions)
    or sell to them (except the Church agents), shall be immediately
    tried for fellowship, and dealt with as offenders, and unless they
    repent shall be cut off from the Church.

    President Rigdon then made some appropriate remarks on speculation.

    Moved, that the conference accept the doings of the Twelve,
    in designating certain individuals to certain cities, &c.;
    when President Smith remarked that the conference had already
    sanctioned the doings of the Twelve; and it belonged to their
    office to transact such business, with the approbation of the First
    Presidency; and he would then state what cities should now be built
    up--viz., Nauvoo, Zarahemla, Warren, Nashville, and Ramus.

    _Resolved_: That this conference adjourn to the general conference
    in October next.

    Closed with prayer by President Young.

    Brigham Young, President.

    Elias Smith,

    Lorenzo Barnes,

    Clerks.

{405}



CHAPTER XXIV.

Hotchkiss Land Purchase Troubles--Death's Harvest, Oliver Granger,
Robert B. Thompson--Important Action Relating to the Twelve--The
Mission in Fox Island.

[Sidenote: The Founding of Warren.]

_Thursday, July 19, 1841_.--Elders Young, Kimball and Richards went to
Warsaw, and examined the town plat of Warren which is situated about a
mile south of the village of Warsaw, and made some arrangements with
the proprietors for building up the place.

The plat designed for the city of Warren is the school section, No.
16, and opposite the first permanent and good landing place on the
Mississippi River below the falls; which is about two miles below the
Warsaw landing, which is filling up with sand bars.

The brethren returned about eleven p. m., quite exhausted.

_Sunday, 22_.--I preached at the stand, on wars and desolations that
await the nations.

_Wednesday, 25_.--I received the following letter:

    _Letter of Horace R. Hotchkiss to Joseph Smith--Land Affairs in
    Nauvoo_.

    Fair Haven, 24th July, 1841.

    _Rev. Joseph Smith_:

    Dear Sir:--I have this moment received a letter from Dr. Galland,
    dated yesterday, at New York, in which he states his intention of
    leaving for the west.

    {406} It certainly was my expectation that I should again see him
    before his departure, and be able to make some arrangement with him
    respecting the interest due to myself, Mr. Tuttle and Mr. Gillet.
    In this I am disappointed, and considering that a proposition for
    effecting this object emanated from your brother Hyrum and the
    doctor, [Isaac Galland] to which no allusion has since been made
    by them or anybody else, I and Mr. Tuttle think that we have much
    reason to be dissatisfied at this silence and apparent neglect.

    Now, all the transactions relating to Nauvoo have by me and my
    friends been entered into in the most perfect good faith, and will
    continue to be conducted on the most honorable principles.

    Permit me to ask whether this is a proper return for the confidence
    we have bestowed, and for the indulgence we have extended?

    If you have not already requested your brother Hyrum to call on me
    when he arrives east, will you write him immediately, and say that
    it is my urgent wish?

    Relative to the Ivins note the Doctor has written me, and referred
    to Mr. William Smith at New Egypt, on whom I shall call next week.

    Your obedient servant,

    Horace R. Hotchkiss.

I wrote the following answer:

    _Letter of the Prophet to Horace R. Hotchkiss--Nauvoo Land
    Transactions_.

    Nauvoo, August 25, 1841.

    _To Horace R. Hotchkiss, Esq., New Haven, Connecticut_:

    Dear Sir:--Yours of the 24th ultimo came to hand this day, the
    contents of which I duly appreciate. I presume you are well aware
    of the difficulties that occurred before, and at the execution
    of the writings in regard to the land transaction between us,
    touching the annual payment of interest: if you have forgotten,
    I will here remind you, you verbally agreed on our refusal and
    hesitancy to execute the notes for the payment of the land, that
    you would not exact the payment of the interest that would accrue
    on them under five years, and that you would not coerce the payment
    even then; to all this you pledged your honor; and upon an after
    arrangement you verbally agreed to take land in some one of the
    Atlantic States, that would yield six per cent interest (to you)
    both for the principal and interest, and in view of that matter,
    I delegated my brother Hyrum and Dr. Isaac Galland to go east and
    negotiate for lands with our friends, and pay you off for the
    {407} whole purchase that we made of you; but upon an interview
    with you, they learned that you were unwilling to enter into an
    arrangement according to the powers that I had delegated to them;
    that you would not receive any of the principal at all, but the
    interest alone, which we never considered ourselves in honor or in
    justice bound to pay under the expiration of five years. I presume
    you are no stranger to the part of the city plat we bought of you
    being a deathly sickly hole, and that we have not been able in
    consequence to realize any valuable consideration from it, although
    we have been keeping up appearances, and holding out inducements
    to encourage immigration, that we scarcely think justifiable in
    consequence of the mortality that almost invariably awaits those
    who come from far distant parts (and that with a view to enable us
    to meet our engagements), and now to be goaded by you, for a breach
    of good faith, and neglect and dishonorable conduct, seems to me to
    be almost beyond endurance.

    You are aware that we came from Missouri destitute of everything
    but physical force, had nothing but our energies and perseverance
    to rely upon to meet the payment of the extortionate sum that
    you exacted for the land we had of you. Have you no feelings of
    commiseration? Or is it your design to crush us with a ponderous
    load before we are able to walk? Or can you better dispose of
    the property than we are doing for your interest? If so, to the
    alternative.

    I therefore propose, in order to avoid the perplexity and annoyance
    that has hitherto attended the transaction, that you come and take
    the premises, and make the best you can of it, or stand off and
    give us an opportunity that we may manage the concern, and enable
    ourselves by the management thereof to meet our engagements, as was
    originally contemplated.

    We have taken a city plat at Warsaw (at the head of navigation
    for vessels of heavy tonnage) on the most advantageous terms: the
    proprietors waiting upon us for the payment of the plat, until we
    can realize the money from the sales, leaving to ourselves a large
    and liberal net profit. We have been making every exertion, and
    used all the means at our command to lay a foundation that will now
    begin to enable us to meet our pecuniary engagements, and no doubt
    in our minds to the entire satisfaction of all those concerned,
    if they will but exercise a small degree of patience, and stay a
    resort to coercive measures which would kill us in the germ, even
    before we can (by reason of the season) begin to bud and blossom in
    order to bring forth a plentiful yield of fruit.

    I am, with considerations of high respect,

    Your obedient servant,

    Joseph Smith.

{408} [Sidenote: Location and Character of the Hotchkiss Lands.]

The Hotchkiss purchase, to which the foregoing letters relate includes
all the land lying north of the White purchase to the river and thence
on the river south, including the best steamboat landing, but is the
most sickly part of Nauvoo.

[Sidenote: Death of Oliver Granger.]

Elder Oliver Granger died at Kirtland, Lake county, Ohio, aged
forty-nine years. He was the son of Pierce and Clarissa Granger, born
in the town of Phelps, Ontario county, New York, 7th February, 1794;
received a common school education, was two years a member of the
Methodist Church and was a licensed exhorter. On the 8th September,
1813, he married Lydia Dibble; in the year 1827, he in a great measure
lost his sight by cold and exposure; he was sheriff of Ontario county,
and colonel of the militia. He received the Gospel on reading the Book
of Mormon, which he providentially obtained, and was baptized at Sodus,
Wayne county, and ordained an Elder by Brigham and Joseph Young, they
being the first Elders he saw, and immediately devoted his time to
preaching and warning the people.

In the year 1833 he moved to Kirtland, and then took a mission to
the east with Elder Samuel Newcomb; returned and was ordained a High
Priest; took another mission in the spring of 1836 to New York with
John P. Greene; and after his return built up a branch at Huntsburg,
Geauga county, Ohio; also a branch at Perry, Richfield county, where he
baptized Bradley Wilson and his seven sons and their wives. When the
Church left Kirtland he was appointed to settle the Church business.

In June, 1838, he went to Far West, and returned in August of same
year; in October he again started, taking his family; he went seventy
miles into Missouri, and was driven back by the mob; in the spring of
1839 he went to Nauvoo; in 1840 removed to Kirtland with his family,
where he remained until his death.

{409} [Sidenote: Character.]

He was a man of good business qualifications, but had been for many
years nearly blind. His funeral was attended by a vast concourse of
people from the neighboring towns, although there were but few Saints
in the country.

_Thursday, 26_.

    _An Epistle of the Twelve Apostles to the Saints Scattered Abroad
    Among the Nations, Greeting_.

    Nauvoo, August 26, 1841.

    Beloved Brethren:--You will perceive by the minutes of a
    conference, held in this city, on the 16th instant, that we have
    returned from a mission which was required of us by the Lord, and
    have now been called upon to assist in building up the stakes of
    Zion, and of planting the Saints upon the lot of their inheritance;
    and feeling as we do a humble reliance upon divine aid at all
    times, in our unremitting desire to be useful to our fellow men,
    and especially to the household of faith, that they may be prepared
    for the great things which God is about to reveal, and which
    speedily await this generation, we feel anxious to improve the
    earliest opportunity to make known unto you the mind of the Spirit
    concerning those things which require your more immediate attention.

    It will be discovered, in the minutes before referred to, that we
    have already begun to select such individuals as have been with the
    Church and have had the opportunity of becoming acquainted with
    the principles thereof to some extent; and to designate certain
    towns and cities where they will locate themselves and build up
    churches, inasmuch as the people are willing to receive them. These
    generally will not take their departure from this to their several
    stations, until after the October conference, previous to which
    they will have the opportunity of receiving particular instructions
    in relation to their mission, and of becoming more perfectly
    acquainted with those principles which are necessary to be acted
    upon in order that they may become highly useful in helping to roll
    forth the kingdom of God in these last days.

    All those Elders and Priests who are now in the vineyard, will
    communicate with us immediately, and inform us of their situations,
    designs, and all things relating to their ministry, and improve the
    earliest opportunity of repairing hither, where they will have the
    privilege of instruction from the First Presidency, and thereby
    understanding principle and doctrine, not to be learned elsewhere,
    and which is necessary for them to know, that they may become wise
    stewards in their Master's house.

    {410} We are engaged in a great work, and but little comparatively
    can be known of the magnitude thereof, of the revelations of
    heaven, and the order of the kingdom by the Saints, while they
    are scattered to the four winds; and this being well understood
    by the ancient prophets and apostles, was the reason why they so
    often spoke of the gathering in the last days, and as this is
    the place where the Elders are to receive instruction concerning
    their ministry, so as to become successful ministers of the
    dispensation of the fulness of times, so also this is the place
    where the brethren may receive such instructions as are necessary
    to constitute them a righteous and holy people, prepared for the
    reception of the Lord Jesus; therefore, we say to all Saints who
    desire to do the will of heaven, Arise, and tarry not, but come
    up hither to the places of gathering as speedily as possible, for
    the time is rapidly approaching when the Saints will have occasion
    to regret that they have so long neglected to assemble themselves
    together and stand in holy places, awaiting those tremendous events
    which are so rapidly approaching the nations of the earth.

    It will be recollected that in a recent communication from the
    First Presidency, all places of gathering are discontinued,
    excepting Hancock county, Illinois, and Zarahemla, in Lee county,
    Iowa territory, opposite Nauvoo, and we would suggest to those
    coming up the Mississippi particularly, and all others who are
    disposed, to look at Warsaw, a beautifully located village about
    twenty miles below Nauvoo, consisting of about five hundred
    inhabitants, a steam flour and lumber mill; one mile below is a
    section already surveyed, on which the town of Warren is to be
    built, and every facility is now offered to the brethren, for the
    immediate erection of houses, the location being very desirable at
    the lowest point of the DesMoines rapids.

    As we have been called upon to act as agents for the Church, it may
    be expected that some one or more of our quorum may be found at
    Nauvoo, Zarahemla, and Warren, ready to render every assistance in
    our power, towards the location of immigrants; and that we shall
    occasionally visit the other places of gathering, as necessity
    requires.

    We recommend to the brethren in England to emigrate in the fall or
    winter; by so doing they will be likely to spare themselves much
    affliction in becoming accustomed to this climate.

    Further communications may be expected from the Twelve.

    Brigham Young,

    Heber C. Kimball,

    Orson Pratt,

    Willard Richards,

    John Taylor,

    Geo. A. Smith.

{411} [Sidenote: Death of Robert B. Thompson.]

_Friday, 27_.--Elder Robert Blashel Thompson died at his residence in
Nauvoo, in the 30th year of his age, in the full hope of a glorious
resurrection. He was associate editor of the _Times and Seasons_,
colonel in the Nauvoo Legion and had done much writing for myself and
the Church.

The following synopsis of his life is from the pen of his widow:

    _Biography of Robert Blashel Thompson_.

    Robert Blashel Thompson was born October 1st, 1811, in Great
    Driffield, Yorkshire, England, was educated at Dunnington, in the
    same county. He united with the Methodists at an early age and
    preached what he believed to be the Gospel in connection with that
    sect for a number of years. Emigrated to Upper Canada in 1834.
    Embraced the Gospel there; being baptized and confirmed by Elder
    Parley P. Pratt in May, 1836. Was ordained an Elder by Elder John
    Taylor, at a conference held in Upper Canada, July 22nd, 1836.
    Removed to Kirtland in May, 1837, where he married Mercy Rachel
    Fielding, June 4th, 1837, and being appointed to take a mission to
    Upper Canada, he returned the same month, and commenced preaching
    in Churchville and the villages adjacent, baptized a considerable
    number, continued his labors there until he was called upon to
    remove to Missouri.

    He arrived at Kirtland in March, and started from thence in company
    with Hyrum Smith and family, arrived in Far West June 3rd, where
    his daughter, Mary Jane, was born on the 14th of June. He remained
    there until November, when he, with many of the brethren had to
    flee into the wilderness to escape the fury of the mob, who swore
    they would kill every man who had been engaged in the Crooked River
    battle.

    He stood near to Brother Patten when he [Patten] fell. With the
    rest of the brethren he suffered much from exposure and lack of
    food, He arrived at Quincy, I believe, in December, where he
    engaged as clerk in the court house, and remained there until the
    liberation of Joseph and Hyrum from prison; when the Saints settled
    in Commerce, he removed there, and was engaged as a scribe to
    Brother Joseph; he was also Church clerk.

    When the Nauvoo Legion was formed, he received the office of
    colonel and also aid-de-camp. In May, 1841, he became associated
    with Don Carlos Smith in the editing of the _Times and Seasons_.
    On the 16th of August he was seized with the same disease of which
    Don Carlos had died on the 7th. The attachment between them was so
    strong, it {412} seemed as though they could not long be separated.
    He died on the 27th, leaving one child; was interred in the burying
    ground on the 29th. By his special request no military procession
    was formed at his funeral.

_Saturday, 28_.--At a conference held at Attica, New York, six
branches, ten Elders, seven Priests, five Teachers, two Deacons and one
hundred and forty-six members were represented.

_Tuesday, 21_.

    _Minutes of a Council Meeting of the Twelve Apostles at the House
    of Brigham Young, Nauvoo_.

    At a council of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles at the house of
    President Brigham Young, Nauvoo, August 31, 1841, for the purpose
    of taking into consideration the situation of the Church, it was
    resolved unanimously, that as we [the Twelve] have been called upon
    by the voice of the conference to attend to the business of the
    Church, assist the Trustee in Trust in his arduous duties, attend
    to the settling of immigrants, &c.; we sensibly feel the great
    responsibility that is resting upon us, and will do all in our
    power to carry out the wishes of the Church, and prove ourselves
    worthy of the trust imposed in us by the brethren.

    _Resolved_ unanimously, that, so far as may be practicable, we will
    attend to the counseling and locating of immigrants in person, and
    at present we will appoint no agents for that purpose out of our
    own body.

    Voted, that Elder Willard Richards be requested to locate himself
    for a season at Warsaw, or vicinity, for the purpose of selling
    lots on the town plat of Warren, counseling the brethren, and
    attending to such other business as may be necessary relating to
    the Church. The foregoing vote was taken after hearing a favorable
    report from Elders Young, Kimball, and Richards, of the quorum, for
    building the town called Warren, they having visited the location,
    accompanied by Mr. Mark Aldrich and other proprietors of the plat.

    _Resolved_, unanimously, that we deeply feel for our beloved
    President Joseph Smith, and his father's family, on account of the
    great losses they have sustained in property by the unparalleled
    persecutions in Missouri, as well as the other many persecutions
    they have sustained since the rise of the Church, which has brought
    them to their present destitute situation. Therefore, voted
    unanimously, that we for ourselves, and the Church we represent,
    approve of the proceedings of President Smith, so far as he has
    gone, in making over certain properties to his wife, children, and
    friends for their support, and that he {413} continue to deed and
    make over certain portions of Church property which now exist, or
    which may be obtained by exchange, as in his wisdom he shall judge
    expedient, till his own, and his father's household, shall have an
    inheritance secured to them in our midst, agreeably to the vote of
    the general conference of the Church held at Commerce in October,
    1839.

    _Resolved_: that on account of the peculiar situation of the Church
    hitherto, it has been expedient and necessary, that the deeds,
    bonds, and properties of the Church should be, and have been taken
    and holden by committees of the Church, and private individuals;
    but that we now have a trustee-in-trust, viz., President Joseph
    Smith, appointed according to the laws of the land. Therefore,
    voted unanimously, that we advise the trustee-in-trust to gather up
    all deeds, bonds, and properties belonging to the Church, and which
    are now held either by committees or individuals, and take the same
    in his own name as trustee-in-trust for the Church of Jesus Christ
    of Latter-day Saints, as soon as such arrangements can be made
    consistently with his various and multiplied cares and business;
    and that we individually and collectively will use all diligence to
    render him every assistance possible to accomplish this desirable
    object.

    Voted, that Elder Lorenzo D. Barnes proceed on his mission to
    England without delay.

    Voted, that Elder Harrison Sagers proceed immediately on his
    mission to Jamaica, West Indies; and Elder Joseph Ball to South
    America, according to their appointment on the 16th, and that they
    accompany each other to New Orleans.

    It was proposed, that Elder Simeon Carter go on a mission to
    Germany; but the vote being taken, it was decided that his mission
    be suspended for the present.

    After much deliberation on the situation of the Church at home and
    abroad, temporarily and spiritually, and in view of the poverty
    and distress of many who had been robbed of all by unrelenting
    mobbers, and of others who have sacrificed all they possessed to
    assist those who had thus been robbed, and others who had borne
    the burden in the heat of the day; it was voted unanimously, that
    President Smith, as trustee-in-trust, be requested and instructed
    by this conference in behalf of the Church, to extend relief to
    such indigent suffering brethren, either by land or goods, as
    the properties of the Church will admit, and his wisdom shall
    judge expedient; so that no one shall be denied the privilege of
    remaining in our midst and enjoying the necessaries of life, who
    has been faithful in his duties to God and the Church.

    Brigham Young, President.

    Willard Richards, Clerk.

{414} _Wednesday, Sept. 1_.--The _New York Sun_ contains an account of
some singular phenomena; viz., a shower of flesh and blood, a pillar of
smoke, and a shower of manna.

_Thursday, 2_.--The town of Cartago, on the isthmus of Darien,
containing 10,000 inhabitants, destroyed by an earthquake.

[Sidenote: Changes of Officers in the Legion.]

_Saturday, 4_.--Colonel Charles C. Rich was elected brigadier-general
of the second cohort, to fill the vacancy of General Don Carlos Smith,
deceased, and Lieutenant-Colonel Titus Billings was elected colonel in
the place of Colonel Rich, promoted, and Major John Scott was elected
lieutenant-colonel in his place, and Captain Hosea Stout was elected
major in his place.

[Sidenote: Changes Among the Civil Officers of Nauvoo.]

The City Council elected Brigham Young councilor in place of Don Carlos
Smith, deceased; and John Taylor and Heber C. Kimball were elected
regents of the University, in place of Don Carlos Smith and Robert B.
Thompson, deceased.

Orson Pratt was elected professor of mathematics in the University of
the City of Nauvoo, and the degree of master of arts conferred on him
by the chancellor and board of regents.

A committee was instructed to purchase two blocks for a burying
ground; and the city recorder was instructed to procure a seal for the
corporation.

Elder Orson Spencer arrived in the city.

[Sidenote: The Prophet on Medicine.]

_Sunday, 5_.--I preached to a large congregation at the stand, on the
science and practice of medicine, desiring to persuade the Saints to
trust in God when sick, and not in an arm of flesh, and live by faith
and not by medicine, or poison; and when they were sick, and had called
for the Elders to pray for them, and they were not healed, to use herbs
and mild food.

[Sidenote: A Shower of "Flesh."]

_Tuesday, 7_.--Another shower of flesh and blood is reported in the
Boston papers to have fallen in {415} Kensington. "There had been a
drizzling rain during a great part of the day, until about 4 o'clock
in the afternoon, when the rain stopped and the dark clouds began
gradually to assume a brassy hue, until the whole heavens above seemed
a sea of fire. The sky continued to grow more bright until about
a quarter past five, when almost instantly it became of burnished
red, and in a few moments it rained moderately a thick liquid of
the appearance of blood, clothing fields and roads for two miles in
circumference in a blood-stained garment. The bloody rain continued for
about ten minutes, when it suddenly cleared away, and the atmosphere
became so intensely cold that overcoats were needed."

Elder Willard Richards went to Warsaw, and located himself, for the
purpose of counseling the Saints, and settling the town of Warren, and
the day following made sale of three city lots.

[Sidenote: British-Chinese War.]

The war between England and China continues. The English have fitted
out a new expedition to proceed against China with the utmost rigor,
and his celestial majesty on the other hand has issued orders for the
raising of a "grand army," and the extermination of the English.

_Wednesday, 8_.--Wars and rumors of wars, earthquakes, tempests,
pestilence, and great fires, connected with every kind of wickedness,
distress and destruction of property are heard in almost every land and
nation.

_Sunday, 11_.

    _Extracts from Legion Minutes_.

    The Legion was out for general parade, in conformity with a special
    act of the court martial, and was reviewed by Lieutenant-General
    Joseph Smith, who delivered a military speech to the troops in his
    usual energetic style. The official returns of the Legion show the
    aggregate to be 1,490 men.

    Hosea Stout, Clerk.

{416} [Sidenote: The Coming of Edward Hunter to Nauvoo.]

_Monday, 13_.--Brother Edward Hunter, Sen, [1] of Chester county,
Pennsylvania, visited Nauvoo, and invested $4,500 in town lots and
farming land; paid me $2,000 in cash, and made arrangements to pay the
balance in two months.

Received an invitation from Brigadier-General Ezekiel W. Swazey, and
Colonel Amos B. Fuller, of the militia of Lee county, Iowa, to attend
the military parade tomorrow, at Montrose, as visitor. Generals Hyrum
Smith and John C. Bennett received a similar invitation.

_Tuesday, 14_.--Went over to Montrose, accompanied by Brothers Edward
Hunter and William A. Gheen. I was very courteously received by General
Swazey, the officers and militia.

[Sidenote: Bitterness of D. W. Kilbourn.]

Mr. D. W. Kilbourn attempted to get up an ill feeling by reading the
following proclamation at noon, during the recess of exercise, to a
considerable number of persons collected round his store, which I
insert verbatim--

    {417} _Citizens of Iowa_:--The laws of Iowa do not require you to
    muster under, or be _reviewed_ by _Joe Smith_ or _General Bennett_,
    and should they have the impudence to attempt it, it is hoped that
    every person having a proper respect for himself, will at once
    leave the ranks.

This, however, had no effect whatever on the people.

Myself and brother were not in military uniform, but were treated with
every respect that visiting officers of our rank could be, through
the entire day. At the dismissal of the military, I went to Mr.
Kilbourn's store, and desired to have some conversation with him, but
was peremptorily ordered out of doors. This conduct greatly disgusted
his few friends, who upbraided Kilbourn with his ungentlemanly conduct,
and accompanied me to the ferry, where I left them, showing me every
manifestation of friendship.

_Tuesday, 21_.--The ship _Tyrean_ sailed from Liverpool to New Orleans,
with 204 Saints, bound for Nauvoo.

Her British Majesty's war steamer _Madagascar_, totally destroyed by
fire in the Chinese seas, and fifty-seven lives lost.

_Wednesday, 22_.--The High Council of Nauvoo adopted the following
preamble and resolution--

    _High Council Resolution_.

    Whereas this High Council in times past, had of necessity, and by
    the advice and instruction of the First Presidency, to transact
    business of a temporal nature for the Church, and thereby involve
    itself with debts and other temporal burdens which, under other
    circumstances would not have devolved upon it; and as the proper
    authorities to which such temporalities belong are now organized
    and acting in their proper places; therefore, be it

    _Resolved_, that this High Council is prepared to transfer all
    debts and temporal business; and that all business of a temporal
    nature, be, and the same is in readiness to be transferred to the
    proper authorities.

    Alpheus Cutler stated [to the council] that he was going to the
    pineries the ensuing winter, and nominated Elias Higbee, counselor_
    pro tem_.

{418} [Sidenote: Lumber for the Temple.]

A company of the brethren started for the pinery, some five or six
hundred miles north, on the river, for the purpose of procuring lumber
for the Temple and Nauvoo House.

The Jews in Smyrna are suffering great persecutions on account of their
religion--"one was thrown into prison because a cat was missing"--say
the journals.

_Saturday 25_.--Hyrum Smith, son of Hyrum and Jerusha Smith, died, aged
seven years, four months, and twenty-eight days.

A conference was held at Vinal Haven, Fox Island; eight Elders, one
Priest, two Teachers, one Deacon, and one hundred and forty members
were represented, and the work is progressing.

I extract the following from Elder Wilford Woodruff's journal--

    _The Work on Fox Island_.

    We left Manitou Island, Lake Michigan, at 4 o'clock p. m., on the
    steamer _Chesapeake_, which contained 300 passengers, six of whom
    were members of the Church; a large quantity of freight and coal,
    eighty cords of wood, eighty mules, besides pigs, chickens, geese,
    ducks, &c.

    We continued our journey towards Chicago without any interruption,
    until half-past eleven p. m., when we were overtaken by a
    tremendous storm of wind and rain; it blew a hurricane, and the
    lake became as rough as it could be by the force of wind, and such
    a scene as quickly followed I never before witnessed in my travels,
    either by land or sea. The captain, officers, hands, and most of
    the passengers expected to go to the bottom of the lake. To have
    judged from outward appearances I should think there were twenty
    chances of being lost to one of being saved, yet I did not once
    expect to be lost, for I believed the Lord would by some means save
    me and my wife and child, who were with me, from a watery grave.

    We were some forty miles from land when the gale struck us, and I
    was awakened from a sound sleep by the cry, "We are all lost." The
    first thought that entered my mind was, "No, we shall not be lost."

    I immediately leaped out of my berth and went on to the upper deck.
    I saw we were in imminent danger of being wrecked; the bow of the
    boat was heavily laden, and frequently engulfed by the heavy waves
    that washed over her; there were judged to be fifty tons of water
    at a {419} time on her bow; at one time her bow ran under water,
    and some thought she would never rise; the water set the mules
    and all the livestock afloat; washed away the partition; and the
    mules, pigs, chickens, ducks, and geese, were all hurled in one
    mass down into the steerage cabin, mixed pell mell with sixty Irish
    passengers, men, women, and children; at that moment the roaring of
    the wind, the rush of the waters, the peals of thunder, the flashes
    of lightning, the braying of asses, the squealing of pigs, the
    quacking of ducks, geese and chickens, the praying, swearing and
    screaming of men, women and children, created a confusion of sounds
    which rent the air, and sent a gloomy thrill through the heart.

    We immediately went to work, and helped all the passengers out of
    the water, and from among the beasts, upon the deck, so their lives
    were preserved, while all the fowls, pigs, and part of the mules
    were drowned or killed; many tons of water rushed through the boat,
    until the water stood nearly to the boilers; it drove the firemen
    from their places.

    About this time when the boat was laboring against wind and tide
    one of the wheel chains broke, and the boat rolled over on to one
    side. I again heard the cry that "all was lost," but about thirty
    of us caught hold of the two detached pieces of chain, and held
    them together until the engineer mended them with wire.

    It took three strong men to manage the wheel; while the boat lay
    upon her side, it washed away a part of the state rooms; orders
    were given to clear the boat of everything that was movable; all
    the wood was fastened with stanchions, on the side that was down,
    the stanchions were knocked out by the passengers, and forty cords
    of wood tumbled into the sea at one surge; this caused the boat
    to right up, and we expected every moment our state room would be
    washed away. I left it three times with my wife and child, and
    stepped upon the main deck, expecting to see it washed away; and to
    add to the horror of the situation, we were wrapped in darkness, as
    all the lanterns were dashed to pieces.

    The men at the wheel labored hard for five hours to turn the boat
    round, before they accomplished it, so that they could run before
    the storm. At length daylight appeared, and with it a cessation of
    the storm in a measure. We returned to Manitou Island at 4 o'clock,
    being twenty-fours hours out, mostly in the storm.

_Thursday, 30_.--The following is a copy of a statement of expenses
consequent upon the arrest of Joseph Smith, upon demand from Governor
Boggs, and sent to the {420} deputy sheriff of Adams county, he having
officiated June, 1841.

    Nauvoo, September 30, 1841.

    _The Deputy Sheriff of Adams County_:

    The following is a statement of my expenses, costs, and
    liabilities, consequent upon my arrest and trial while in your
    custody, to-wit--

    To amount of fees in Esquires Ralston, Warren, and Co.......$250.00

    To Esquires Little, Williams, Walker, and Browning............100.00

    To seven days for self, horse, and carriage, at
    $5.00............35.00

    To money expended during that time, consequent upon the
    arrest...60.00

    To twelve witnesses, to-wit: Elias Higbee, John P. Greene, Amasa
    Lyman, Darwin Chase, Francis Higbee, Chauncy Higbee, Reynolds
    Cahoon, George W. Robinson, J. Younger, L. Woodworth, Vinson
    Knight, and Robert B. Thompson, four days each; their time,
    carriages, horses and expenses, at $5.00 each day...240.00

    $685.00

    Dear Sir:--You will please take such measures as to put me in
    possession of the above amount, which is justly due me as above
    stated; to say nothing of false imprisonment and other expenses.
    This would have been presented earlier, but for the sickness and
    death of Robert B. Thompson, my clerk.

    Receive my respects, &c.,

    Joseph Smith.

    Per John S. Fullmer.

_Friday, October 1_.--Among the interesting relics of antiquity which
have been brought to light in these days, is the following sentence
from the _Courier des Etats Unis_:

    _Sentence Rendered by Pontius Pilate, Acting Governor of Lower
    Galilee, Stating that Jesus of Nazareth shall Suffer Death on the
    Cross_.

    In the year seventeen of the Emperor Tiberius Caesar, and the 25th
    day of March, the city of the Holy Jerusalem, Anna and Caiaphas
    being priests, sacrificators of the people of God, Pontius Pilate,
    governor of Lower Galilee, sitting on the presidential chair of
    the Praetory, condemns Jesus of Nazareth to die on the cross
    between two thieves--the great and notorious evidence of the people
    saying--1. Jesus is a {421} seducer. 2. He is seditious. 3. He is
    an enemy of the law. 4. He calls himself falsely the Son of God.
    5. He calls himself falsely the King of Israel. 6. He entered into
    the temple, followed by a multitude bearing palm branches in their
    hands. Order the first centurion, Quills Cornelius, to lead him to
    the place of execution. Forbid to any person whomsoever, either
    poor or rich, to oppose the death of Jesus.

    The witnesses who signed the condemnation of Jesus are, viz.--1.
    Daniel Robani. 2. Raphel Robani. 3. Capet, a citizen. Jesus shall
    go out of the city of Jerusalem by the gate of Struenus.

    The above sentence is engraved on a copper plate; on one side are
    written these words--"A similar plate is sent to each tribe." It
    was found in an antique vase of white marble, while excavating
    in the ancient city of Aquilla, in the kingdom of Naples, in the
    year 1820, and was discovered by the Commissaries of Arts attached
    to the French armies. At the expedition of Naples, it was found
    enclosed in a box of ebony, in the Sacristy of the Chartrem. The
    vase in the Chapel of Caserta. The French translation was made
    by the members of the Commission of Arts. The original is in the
    Hebrew language. The Chartrem requested earnestly that the plate
    should not be taken away from them. The request was granted as a
    reward for the sacrifice they had made for the army. M. Denon,
    one of the Savans, caused a plate to be made of the same model,
    on which he had engraved the above sentence. At the sale of his
    collection of antiquities, &c., it was bought by Lord Howard for
    2,890 francs. Its intrinsic value and interest are much greater.

    A few years ago, there was found at Catskill, in New York, a
    shekel of Israel, of the time of our Savior. On one side was the
    representation of a palm leaf, on the other a picture of the
    temple, with the words underneath, "Holy Jerusalem," in the Hebrew
    tongue.

Relics like these, properly authenticated, have about them an
inexpressible sacredness. [2]

Footnotes:

1. Edward Hunter was the second son and seventh child of Edward and
Hannah Hunter. He was born in Newtown Township, Delaware county,
Pennsylvania. June 22, 1793. His paternal ancestors were from the
north of England, and on his mother's side he was of Welsh extraction.
John Hunter, his great-grandfather, passed over to Ireland some time
in the seventeenth century and served as a lieutenant of cavalry
under William of Orange at the battle of the Boyne, where he was
wounded. He afterwards came to America and settled in Delaware county,
Pennsylvania, about twelve miles from Philadelphia. Edward Hunter,
Esq., the Bishop's father, was justice of the peace in Delaware county
for forty years. On his mother's side three generations back was Robert
Owen of North Wales, a man of wealth and character, a firm sympathizer
with Cromwell and the Protectorate, who on the restoration of Charles
the Second, refused to take the oath of allegiance, and was imprisoned
for five years. After his release he emigrated to America and purchased
property near the "City of Brotherly Love." Like the founder of that
city, Robert Owen was a Quaker. His son George sat in the state
legislature and held various positions of public trust (Whitney).

Edward Hunter finally settled in Chester county, Pennsylvania, where
he purchased an extensive farm, and married Ann Standley, daughter of
Jacob and Martha Standley. Here Mormonism found him in 1839, through
the preaching of some of the Elders laboring in that vicinity, and Mr.
Hunter extended to them the hospitality of his home. En route from
Washington to Nauvoo, in the winter of 1839-40, the Prophet Joseph
visited him, and for several days preached in the vicinity of the
Hunter homestead. Other prominent Elders of the Church also visited the
Hunter home, among them the Prophet's brother, Hyrum. Finally on the
8th of October, 1841, Edward Hunter was baptized by Elder Orson Hyde,
then on his way to Jerusalem. This brings the biography of the future
Bishop of the Church up to the time of his first appearance in Nauvoo,
on the 13th of September, 1841, and henceforth the events of his life
will be closely interwoven in the history of the Church.

2. To the sentiment here expressed by the Prophet, no one will withhold
his assent, but he will need to emphasize the phrase "properly
authenticated," because it is unquestionably the case that many
alleged early Christian documents of the character of the above are
spurious: and whether the above alleged formal sentence was really
rendered by Pontius Pilate or not, may not be determined. As remarked
by nearly all authorities upon this subject, it is probable that
Pilate made an official report to Tiberius of both the condemnation
and punishment of Jesus Christ. Rev. J. R. Beard, D. D., member of the
Historico-Theological society of Liepzig, and author of the article
"Pilate," in Kitto's Biblical Literature, says: "The voice of antiquity
intimates that Pilate did make such a report; the words of Justin
Martyr are: [second century] 'That these things were so done you may
know from the 'Acts' made in the time of Pontius Pilate.' A similar
passage is found a little further on in the same work [i. e. Justin's
apology]. Now when it is considered that Justin's Apology was a set
defense of Christianity, in the shape of an appeal to the heathen
world through the persons of its highest functionaries, it must seem
very unlikely that the words would have been used had no such document
existed; and nearly as improbable that these 'Acts' [of Pilate] would
have been referred to had they not been genuine." Dr. Lardner, who
has, perhaps, more fully discussed the subject than any other writer
upon it, decides that, "It must be allowed by all that Pontius Pilate
composed some memoirs concerning our Savior, and sent them to the
emperor." (See Lardner, Vol. vi, p. 610.) And yet this very author says
that the Acts of Pontius Pilate, "and his letter to Tiberius which we
now have, are not genuine, but manifestly spurious."

In Smith's Dictionary of the Bible, it is stated that "We learn from
Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Eusebius and others, that Pilate made an
official report to Tiberius of our Lord's trial and condemnation, and
in a homily ascribed to, though marked as spurious by his Benedictine
editors, certain 'acts' or 'comments' of Pilate, are spoken of as well
known documents in common circulation." (Article Pilate.) Then the
author of this article on Pilate--Rev. Henry Wright Phillott, student
of Christ Church, Oxford, adds: "That he, (Pilate) made such a report
is highly probable, and it may have been in existence in Chrysostom's
time; but the 'Acts of Pilate,' (Acta Pilati,) now extant in Greek, and
two Latin epistles from him to the emperor, are certainly spurious;"
and it is further said, "The number of extant 'Acta Pilati,' in various
forms, is so large as to show that very early the demand created a
supply of documents manifestly spurious, and we have no reason for
looking on any one of those that remain as more authentic than the
others."

Whether or not the above document in the text, purported to be Pilate's
formal sentence of death upon Jesus is among the early Christian
documents that are spurious, I am not able to determine by any works
at my command, and the modification in the sentence of the Prophet
above, which states, that "relics like these, _property authenticated_,
have about them an inexpressible sacredness," would rather indicate
the existence of doubt in his own mind as to the absolute certainty of
the above document being genuine; and I by no means consider that he
commits himself to the genuineness of the document by publishing it in
the annals of the Church. Such documents are only inexpressibly sacred
if the authentication is beyond question; and he does not here discuss
that question.

{422}

{423}



CHAPTER XXV.

The General Conference of the Church at Nauvoo--Doctrinal Sermon by the
Prophet--Baptism for the Dead--Angels and Ministering Spirits--Epistle
of the Twelve Reviewing Status of the Church.

[Sidenote: Suit Against Geo. M. Hinckle.]

George M. Hinckle, who robbed my house in Far West while I was in
prison, passing down the river with a flat boat, I commenced suit
against him before the District Court, now sitting at Burlington, Iowa.
I sent Elias Smith, and Geo. W. Gee to attend to the suit; but Hinckle
gave security, and got it put off till spring.

Day stormy and cold, a few assembled, but conference did not organize.

I received a letter from Benjamin Winchester, requesting to be
excused from accompanying Elder Erastus Snow on his mission to Salem,
Massachusetts, on account of ill health and pecuniary embarrassments,
and expressing his conviction that Elder John E. Page had means enough
to accompany Elder Orson Hyde to Jerusalem.

_Saturday, October 2, 1841_.

    _Minutes of the General Conference of the Church Held at Nauvoo_.

    Conference met in the Grove. The Presidency being absent laying the
    corner stone of the Nauvoo House, the meeting was called to order
    by President Brigham Young; the several quorums were arranged and
    seated in order.

    President Brigham Young opened conference by prayer.

    The conference then made choice of President Joseph Smith to
    preside, and Elias Smith and Gustavus Hills, Clerks. Meeting
    adjourned until 2 p. m.

    Prayer by Orson Pratt.

    {424} _2 p. m_., President Joseph Smith opened the meeting. Choir
    sung the 18th hymn.

    The President then read a letter from Elder Orson Hyde, dated
    Ratisbon, July 17, 1841, giving an account of his journey and
    success in his mission, which was listened to with intense
    interest; and the conference by vote, expressed their approbation
    of the style and spirit of said letter. The President then made
    remarks on the inclemency of the weather, and the uncomfortable
    situation of the Saints with regard to a place of worship, and a
    place of public entertainment.

    The conference was then called upon by the President, to elect a
    general Church clerk, in place of Robert B. Thompson, deceased.
    James Sloan was nominated and elected.

    Elder Lyman Wight nominated Bishop George Miller to preside over
    the High Priests' quorum in place of Don Carlos Smith, deceased. He
    was duly elected.

    President Brigham Young then presented the business commenced at
    the late special conference of the 16th of August with regard
    to the appointment of suitable and faithful men to the several
    important stations of labor in this and other countries.

    Elder Lyman Wight addressed the conference on the importance of
    order, uniformity of instruction, and unanimity of effort to spread
    the work of the kingdom.

    President Joseph Smith made some corrections of doctrine, quoting
    I Cor. xii: 28, showing the principle of order and unity in the
    offices of the Priesthood.

    The Patriarch Hyrum Smith made remarks disapproving of the course
    pursued by some Elders in counteracting the efforts of the
    presidency to gather the Saints, and in enticing them to stop in
    places not appointed for the gathering, particularly referring to
    the conduct of Elder Almon W. Babbitt of Kirtland.

    Elders Lyman Wight, and Henry W. Miller testified that they had
    traveled in places where Elder Babbitt had been, on his return
    from his visit to Nauvoo, [he had] taught doctrine contrary to the
    revelations of God, and detrimental to the interests of the Church.

    Moved and carried that Elder Almon W. Babbitt be disfellowshiped
    until he shall make satisfaction.

    Choir sang Hymn 124. Prayer by Elder George A. Smith.

    Conference adjourned until tomorrow at nine o'clock.

    _Sunday, 3_.

    Conference assembled in Nauvoo according to adjournment; prayer by
    Elder Heber C. Kimball.

    President Joseph Smith, by request of the Twelve Apostles gave
    instructions on the doctrine of baptism for the dead, which were
    listened {425} to with intense interest by the large assembly. He
    presented baptism for the dead as the only way that men can appear
    as saviors on Mount Zion.

    The proclamation of the first principles of the Gospel was a
    means of salvation to men individually; and it was the truth,
    not men, that saved them; but men, by actively engaging in rites
    of salvation substitutionally became instrumental in bringing
    multitudes of their kindred into the kingdom of God.

    He explained the difference between an angel and a ministering
    spirit; the one a resurrected or translated body, with its spirit
    ministering to embodied spirits--the other a disembodied spirit,
    visiting and ministering to disembodied spirits. Jesus Christ
    became a ministering spirit (while His body was lying in the
    sepulchre) to the spirits in prison, to fulfill an important part
    of His mission, without which He could not have perfected His work,
    or entered into His rest. After His resurrection He appeared as an
    angel to His disciples.

    Translated bodies cannot enter into rest until they have undergone
    a change equivalent to death. Translated bodies are designed for
    future missions.

    The angel that appeared to John on the Isle of Patmos was a
    translated or resurrected body [i. e. personage], Jesus Christ went
    in body after His resurrection, to minister to resurrected bodies.
    There has been a chain of authority and power from Adam down to the
    present time.

    The best way to obtain truth and wisdom is not to ask it from
    books, but to go to God in prayer, and obtain divine teaching. It
    is no more incredible that God should _save_ the dead, than that he
    should _raise_ the dead.

    There is never a time when the spirit is too old to approach
    God. All are within the reach of pardoning mercy, who have not
    committed the unpardonable sin, which hath no forgiveness, neither
    in this world, nor in the world to come. There is a way to release
    the spirits of the dead; that is by the power and authority of
    the Priesthood--by binding not loosing on earth. This doctrine
    appears glorious, inasmuch as it exhibits the greatness of divine
    compassion and benevolence in the extent of the plan of human
    salvation.

    This glorious truth is well calculated to enlarge the
    understanding, and to sustain the soul under troubles, difficulties
    and distresses. For illustration, suppose the case of two men,
    brothers, equally intelligent, learned, virtuous and lovely,
    walking in uprightness and in all good conscience, so far as they
    have been able to discern duty from the muddy stream of tradition,
    or from the blotted page of the book of nature.

    One dies and is buried, having never heard the Gospel of
    reconciliation; to the other the message of salvation is sent,
    he hears and {426} embraces it, and is made the heir of eternal
    life. Shall the one become the partaker of glory and the other be
    consigned to hopeless perdition? Is there no chance for his escape?
    Sectarianism answers "none." Such an idea is worse than atheism.
    The truth shall break down and dash in pieces all such bigoted
    Pharisaism; the sects shall be sifted, the honest in heart brought
    out, and their priests left in the midst of their corruption.

    Many objections are urged against the Latter-day Saints for not
    admitting the validity of sectarian baptism, and for withholding
    fellowship from sectarian churches. Yet to do otherwise would
    be like putting new wine into old bottles, and putting old wine
    into new bottles. What! new revelations in the old churches? New
    revelations would knock out the bottom of their bottomless pit. New
    wine into old bottles! The bottles burst and the wine runs out!
    What! Sadducees in the new church! Old wine in new leathern bottles
    will leak through the pores and escape. So the Sadducee saints mock
    at authority, kick out of the traces, and run to the mountains of
    perdition, leaving the long echo of their braying behind them.

    He then referred to the [lack of] charity of the sects, in
    denouncing all who disagree with them in opinion, and in joining in
    persecuting the Saints, who believe that even such may be saved,
    in this world and in the world to come (murderers and apostates
    excepted).

    This doctrine presents in a clear light the wisdom and mercy of
    God in preparing an ordinance for the salvation of the dead,
    being baptized by proxy, their names recorded in heaven and they
    judged according to the deeds done in the body. This doctrine
    was the burden of the scriptures. Those Saints who neglect it
    in behalf of their deceased relatives, do it at the peril of
    their own salvation. The dispensation of the fullness of times
    will bring to light the things that have been revealed in all
    former dispensations; also other things that have not been before
    revealed. He shall send Elijah, the Prophet, &c., and restore all
    things in Christ.

    President Joseph Smith then announced: "There shall be no more
    baptisms for the dead, until the ordinance can be attended to in
    the Lord's House; and the Church shall not hold another General
    Conference, until they can meet in said house. _For thus saith the
    Lord_!"

    Prayer by President Hyrum Smith.

    Adjourned for one hour.

    Afternoon conference opened by the choir singing hymn 105, and
    prayer by Elder Lyman Wight.

    President Brigham Young addressed the Elders at some length, on
    the importance of teaching abroad the first principles of the
    Gospel, leaving the mysteries of the kingdom to be taught among the
    Saints, {427} also on the propriety of many of the Elders remaining
    at home, and working on the Lord's House; and that their labors
    will be as acceptable to the Lord as their going abroad, and more
    profitable for the Church. That those who go abroad must take a
    recommend from the proper authorities, without which they will not
    be fellowshiped; and that those who go, and those who remain make
    consecrations more abundantly than heretofore.

    Elder Lyman Wight followed with remarks of a similar purport;
    resigning his mission of gathering means for the Temple and Nauvoo
    House.

    The conference appointed Elias Higbee, John Taylor, and Elias
    Smith, to petition Congress for redress of wrongs sustained in
    Missouri; and Elder John Taylor to present the petition.

    Closed by the choir singing hymn 125, and prayer by President John
    Smith.

    Conference assembled on the morning of Monday, the 4th.

    Prayer by Elder George A. Smith.

    President Joseph Smith made a lengthy exposition of the condition
    of the temporal affairs of the Church, the agency of which had been
    committed to him at a general conference in Quincy--explaining the
    manner that he had discharged the duties involved in the agency,
    and the conditions of the lands and other property of the Church.

    On motion, resolved: that Elder Reuben McBride be invested with
    power of attorney to settle the business at Kirtland, left in an
    uncertain condition by Elder Oliver Grange, deceased.

    Prayer by Elder Lyman Wight.

    Adjourned for one hour.

    Afternoon conference opened. Prayer by President John Smith.

    Elder Lyman Wight spoke at some length on the subject introduced in
    the former part of the day, and on the old debts and obligations
    that are frequently brought up from Kirtland and Missouri; one
    of which, in the form of a $50 note, he held in his hand, and
    proclaimed it as his text.

    On motion, voted unanimously, that the trustee-in-trust be
    instructed not to appropriate Church property to liquidate old
    claims that may be brought forward from Kirtland and Missouri.

    President Hyrum Smith presented to the notice of the conference
    some embarrassment growing out of his signing as security, a
    certain obligation in Kirtland in favor of Mr. Eaton.

    Voted, that Church property here shall not be appropriated to
    liquidate said claim.

    President Brigham Young made some appropriate and weighty remarks
    on the importance of more liberal consecrations and more {428}
    energetic efforts to forward the work of building the Temple and
    Nauvoo House; and after purchasing Elder Wight's text, by paying
    him fifty cents, tore it in pieces and gave it to the winds,
    saying, "Go ye and do likewise, with all old claims against the
    Church."

    Choir sang hymn 104, and President Hyrum Smith closed by prayer.

    _Tuesday, 5th_. Conference opened by the choir singing hymn 274,
    and prayer by Elder Orson Pratt.

    Elder Orson Pratt, by request of President Joseph Smith, read a
    letter from Smith Tuttle, Esq., one of the proprietors of the
    Hotchkiss purchase, in reference to some misunderstanding in the
    adjustment of their claims, and conciliatory of any hard feelings
    growing out of such misunderstanding.

    President Brigham Young spoke on the contents of the letter, and
    expressed his earnest desire that the business might be speedily
    adjusted, and a proper title obtained by the Church.

    Elders Lyman Wight and Hyrum Smith followed with appropriate
    remarks.

    On motion, voted, That President Joseph Smith write to Mr.
    Hotchkiss on the subject.

    On motion by President Joseph Smith, voted, that the Twelve write
    an epistle to the Saints abroad, to use their influence and
    exertions to secure by exchange, purchase, donation, &c., a title
    to the Hotchkiss purchase.

    President Brigham Young presented an appeal from the decision of
    the Elders' quorum on a charge made against Elder John A. Hicks by
    Dimick B. Huntington for a breach of the ordinances of the city,
    for falsehood and schismatical conversation. After hearing the
    testimony in the case it was voted that Elder John A. Hicks be cut
    off from the Church.

    Closed by the choir singing hymn 275; prayer by President Brigham
    Young.

    Adjourned for one hour.

    Afternoon conference opened by the choir singing hymn 104, and
    prayer by Elder Orson Pratt, who then read the minutes of a special
    conference held in Nauvoo, August 16, 1841.

    President Joseph Smith made remarks explanatory of the importance
    of the resolutions and votes passed at that time

    On motion, voted, that this conference sanction the doings of said
    special conference.

    President Brigham Young proposed to the congregation, that those
    who would take laborers on the Lord's House to board, while thus
    laboring, should manifest their willingness by rising and giving
    their names. About sixty persons arose.

    {429} Conference closed by the choir singing hymn 284, and prayer
    by President Brigham Young.

    Conference adjourned _sine die_.

    Although the conference commenced under discouraging circumstances
    owing to the inclemency of the weather, yet a vast number of the
    brethren and visitors from abroad were present, and on Saturday and
    Sunday, the weather having become favorable, the congregation was
    immense. The greatest unanimity prevailed; business was conducted
    with the most perfect harmony and good feelings, and the assembly
    dispersed with new confidence in the great work of the last days.

    Joseph Smith, President.

    Elias Smith,

    Gustavus Hills,

    Clerks.

An earthquake at Constantinople, occasioning extensive destruction of
property.

Elder Joseph Beebee writes from New York that he has been preaching in
that city, and has baptized twenty-nine.

_Wednesday, 6_.--Elder Woodruff arrived in Nauvoo.

Elders Kimball, Richards, and Woodruff laid hands on President Young,
who was very sick, and he recovered.

_Thursday, 7_.

    _Minutes of a Meeting of the Council of the Twelve_.

    Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, Lyman Wight,
    John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and Willard Richards, of the quorum
    of the Twelve Apostles, assembled in council at the house of Elder
    John Taylor. Voted, that

    Elder John D. Lee go on a mission to Jackson and Rutherford
    counties, Tennessee.

    Elder David Evans, to Augusta, Iowa Territory.

    Elder Elisha H. Groves, to Iowa county, Wisconsin.

    Elder Hiram Clark, to Pike, Brown, and Adams counties, Illinois.

    Elder Joseph Ball, to South America.

    Elder Harrison Sagers, to Jamaica.

    Elder William Bosley, to Utica, New York.

    Elder Amasa Lyman, to New York City.

    Elder Arza Adams to Kingston, Canada.

    Elder Lyman Stoddard, to go with Elisha H. Groves to Wisconsin.

    {430} Elder Phinehas H. Young, to Cincinnati, Ohio.

    Elder Abraham Palmer, to Chicago, Illinois.

    Elder George W. Gee, to Pittsburg, Pennsylvania.

    Elder James Blakesley, to Nauvoo, Illinois.

    Elder John D. Parker, to New Orleans, Louisiana.

    Voted, that Phinehas H. Young be ordained to a High Priest and
    recommended accordingly.

    That Daniel Garns be nominated for president of the Elders' quorum.

    That a conference be held at Father Morley's, at Lima, on Saturday
    and Sunday, the 23rd and 24th instant.

    That a committee of three, namely, Brigham Young, Willard Richards,
    and John Taylor be a committee to draft an address to the eastern
    churches, as directed by the general conference.

    Adjourned to Bishop Miller's tomorrow evening at 6 o'clock.

    Brigham Young, President.

    Willard Richards, Clerk.

_Saturday, 9_.

    _Copy of a Letter to Smith Tuttle, Esq.--The Hotchkiss Land
    Troubles_.

    Dear Sir:--Your kind letter of September was received during our
    conference, which is just over, containing a full and particular
    explanation of everything which gave rise to some feelings of
    disappointment in relation to our business transactions; and I
    will assure you it has allayed on our part every prejudice. It
    breathes the spirit of kindness and truth. I will assure you that
    we exceedingly regret that there has been any ground for hardness
    and disappointment. But as far as I am concerned, I must plead
    innocent, and you will consider me so, when you come to know all
    the facts. I have done all that I could on my part. I will still do
    all that I can. I will not leave one stone unturned.

    Now the facts are these: I sent my brother Hyrum, and Doctor
    Galland with means in their hands--say not money--but with power to
    obtain either property or money which was necessary to enable them
    to fulfill the contract I made with Mr. Hotchkiss. My brother Hyrum
    was under the necessity of returning to this place on account of
    his ill health, leaving the business in the hands of Dr. Galland,
    with the fullest expectation that he would make over the property
    or money to Mr. Hotchkiss, and make everything square so far as the
    interest is concerned, if not the principal. He was instructed to
    pay the interest that had accrued, and should accrue up to the fall
    of 1842, so as to be in advance of our indebtedness.

    {431} I had also made arrangements with the eastern churches, and
    had it in my power to deed over lands for the whole debt, and had
    expected that an arrangement of that kind would have been entered
    into.

    I am well assured that Dr. Galland did not look for any means
    whatever, to pay the interest at any rate, if not the principal;
    and, why he has not done according to my instructions, God only
    knows. I do not feel to charge him with having done wrong, until I
    can investigate the matter, and ascertain to a certainty where the
    fault lies. It may be through sickness or disaster, this strange
    neglect has happened. I would to God the thing had not happened.

    When I read Mr. Hotchkiss' letter, I learned that he was
    dissatisfied. I thought that he meant to oppress me, and felt
    accordingly mortified and sorrowful in the midst of affliction, to
    think that he should distrust me for a moment that I would not do
    all that was within my power.

    But upon having an explanation of the whole matter, my feelings are
    changed, and I think that you all have had cause for complaining.
    But you will in the magnanimity of your good feelings, certainly
    not blame me when you find that I have discharged an honorable duty
    on my part.

    I regret exceedingly that I did not know some time since what I
    now know, that I might have made another effort before it got so
    late. Cold weather is now rolling in upon us. I have been confined
    here this season by sickness, and various other things that were
    beyond my control; such as having been demanded by the governor of
    Missouri, of the governor of this state, and he did not have moral
    courage enough to resist the demand, although it was founded in
    injustice and cruelty. I accordingly was taken prisoner, and they
    put me to some ten or eleven hundred dollars' expense and trouble,
    such as lawyer's fees, witnesses, &c., &c., before I could be
    redeemed from under the difficulty. But I am now clear of them once
    more.

    And now in contemplating the face of the whole subject, I
    find that I am under the necessity of asking a little further
    indulgence--say, till next spring, so that I may be enabled to
    recover myself, and then, if God spares my life, and gives me power
    to do so, I will come in person to your country, and will never
    cease my labors until the whole matter is completely adjusted to
    the full satisfaction of all of you. The subject of your debt was
    fairly presented before our general conference held on the first of
    this month, consisting of ten thousand people for their decision on
    the wisest and best course in relation to meeting your demands.

    The Twelve, as they are denominated in the _Times and Seasons_
    were ordered by the conference to make arrangements in the Eastern
    branches of the Church, ordering them to go to you and turn over
    their {432} property as you and they might agree, and take up our
    obligations and bring them here, and receive property here for
    them; and I have been ordered by the conference to write this
    letter to you, informing you of the measures which are about to be
    taken to make all things right.

    I would inform you that Dr. Galland has not returned to the western
    country as yet. He has a considerable amount of money in his hands,
    which was to have been paid to you, as we intended. He is on his
    way, for aught we know, and is retarded in his journey by some
    misfortune or other. He may return, however, as yet, and give a
    just and honorable account of himself. We hope this may be the
    case. I am sorrowful on account of your disappointments. It is a
    great disappointment to me, as well as to yourselves.

    As to the growth of our place, it is very rapid, and it would be
    more so, were it not for sickness and death. There have been many
    deaths, which leaves a melancholy reflection, but we cannot help
    it. When God speaks from the heavens to call us hence, we must
    submit to His mandates.

    And as for your sincerity and friendship, gentlemen, we have not
    the most distant doubt of it. We will not have any. We know it is
    for your interest to do us good, and for our welfare and happiness
    to be punctual in fulfillment of all our vows, and we think for the
    future you will have no cause for complaint. We intend to struggle
    with all our misfortunes in life, and shoulder them up handsomely,
    like men.

    We ask nothing, therefore, but what ought to be required between
    man and man, and by those principles which bind man to man, by
    kindred blood, in bearing our own part in everything which duty
    calls us to do, as not inferior to any of the human race; and we
    will be treated as such, although we differ with some in matters
    of opinion in things (viz., religious matters), for which we only
    feel ourselves amenable to the Eternal God. And may God forbid that
    pride, ambition, a want of humanity, in any degree of importance,
    should have any unjust dominion in our bosoms.

    We are the sons of Adam. We are the free born sons of America, and
    having been trampled upon, and our rights taken from us--even our
    constitutional rights, by a good many who boast themselves of being
    valiant in freedom's cause, while their hearts possess not a spark
    of its benign and enlightening influence--will afford a sufficient
    excuse, we hope, for any harsh remarks that may have been dropped
    by us, when we thought there was an assumption of superiority
    designed to gall our feelings.

    We are very sensitive as a people--we confess it: but we want to
    be pardoned for our sins, if any we have committed. With regard to
    the {433} time when the first payment of interest should be called
    for, it appears we misunderstood each other, but suffice it to
    say, that it shall not prevent our making arrangements concerning
    the whole matter. It is still, however, my firm conviction that my
    understanding concerning the interest was correct.

    I remain, gentlemen, with sentiments of respect, yours, &c.,

    Joseph Smith.

_Monday, 10_.--The Twelve met for the purpose of counsel, and spent
most of the day in visiting the sick.

Elder Erastus Snow writes from Northbridge, Massachusetts. He had been
laboring in Salem and vicinity four weeks, organized a branch of thirty
members, and the prospects are flattering.

_Tuesday, 12_.

    _An Epistle of the Twelve Apostles, to the Brethren Scattered
    Abroad on the Continent of America, Greeting_:

    Beloved Brethren:--It seemeth good to us to write unto you at this
    time concerning the great things of the kingdom of our God, and
    more especially as we have been called upon by the late general
    conference so to do, that the work may not be hindered, but that
    all may understand their privilege and duty in this day of glorious
    events, so that by exercising themselves therein, they may attain
    unto those blessings which God has in store for His people in the
    last days.

    We have abundant occasion, and we rejoice exceedingly at the
    privilege we have had of beholding so many thousands of our
    brethren and sisters as were assembled at the late conference;
    and for the perfect harmony and good feeling which prevailed
    throughout all their deliberations; for the great amount of
    valuable instructions by President Joseph Smith and others; and
    for the disposition which we have seen manifested, by all who were
    present, to carry into effect all those noble plans and principles
    which were derived from heaven, and have been handed down to earth
    to carry forward the great and glorious work which is already
    commenced, and which must be consummated to secure the salvation of
    Israel.

    While the minutes of the general conference are before you, which
    will be read with interest by every lover of Zion, we shall
    recapitulate some items, and detail more particularly to the
    understanding of those who had not the privilege of being present
    on that interesting occasion, {434} the past, present and future
    situation and prospects of the Church, and the stakes, and those
    things which immediately concern their best interests.

    A short time since, and the Saints were fleeing from their enemies.
    Whippings, imprisonments, tortures, and death stared them in the
    face, and they were compelled to seek an asylum in a land of
    strangers. They sought, they found it within the peaceful bosom
    of Illinois--a state whose citizens are inspired with a love of
    liberty, whose souls are endowed with those noble principles of
    charity and benevolence which ever bid the stranger welcome, and
    minister to his wants; in this state, whose soil is vieing with
    its citizens in all that is good and lovely, the Saints have found
    a resting place where, freed from tyranny and mobs, they are
    beginning to realize the fulfillment of the ancient prophets--"They
    shall build houses and inhabit them, plant vineyards and eat the
    fruit thereof, having none to molest or make afraid."

    In this city, the Church has succeeded in securing several
    extensive plats of land, which have been laid out in city lots, a
    part of which have been sold, a part has been distributed to the
    widow and orphan, and a part remains for sale. These lots are for
    the inheritance of the Saints, a resting place for the Church, a
    habitation for the God of Jacob; for here He has commanded a house
    to be built unto His name where He may manifest Himself unto His
    people as in former times, when He caused the ark, the tabernacle,
    and the temple to be reared, and the cloud, and the fire to rest
    down thereon; and not that the temple be built only, but that
    it be completed quickly, and that no more general conference be
    held, till it shall be held therein; and that the Nauvoo House be
    finished for the accommodation of the brethren from afar, and the
    stranger who shall come up hither to inquire after the work of the
    Lord, and worship in His temple.

    Scores of brethren in this city have offered to board one and two
    laborers each, till the temple is completed, many have volunteered
    to labor continually, and the brethren generally are giving
    one-tenth part of their time, or one-tenth part of their income,
    according to circumstances; while those sisters who can do nothing
    more, are knitting socks and mittens, and preparing garments for
    the laborers, so that they may be made as comfortable as possible
    during the coming winter. In view of these things we would invite
    our brethren for many miles distant around us, to send in their
    teams for drawing stone, lumber, and materials for the building;
    and at the same time load their wagons with all kinds of grain
    and meat, provisions, and clothing, and hay, and provender in
    abundance, that the laborer faint not, and the teams be made
    strong; also that journeymen stonecutters, &c., come, bringing
    their tools with them, and enlist in the glorious enterprise.

    {435} Most of the plats in this city before referred to, as well
    as several farms and large lots of land in this, and adjoining
    counties are paid for, and secured to the Church by good and
    sufficient titles; while the town plat for the town of Warren,
    near Warsaw, is secured on such conditions that the brethren can
    be accommodated with lots on very reasonable terms; but the large
    plat in Nauvoo, purchased of Messrs. Hotchkiss, Tuttle & Co., of
    New Haven, Connecticut, remains unpaid for, and the time has now
    arrived, when it is very desirable on the part of the Church, as
    well as on the part of the gentlemen of whom it was purchased,
    that payment should be made, and a warrantee title secured; to
    accomplish which we have been called upon by the united voice of
    the general conference to address the churches in the eastern
    states, to advise with the brethren in those regions, and devise
    ways and means whereby this debt may be liquidated, Hotchkiss & Co.
    satisfied, the plat secured to the Church, and the brethren in the
    East at the same time transfer their real estate from the place
    where it now is, to this city or region of country, according to
    their desire.

    The contract for the "Hotchkiss purchase" in Nauvoo, consisting
    of upwards of five hundred acres, was entered into on or about
    the 9th of August, 1839, for the specified sum of fifty-three
    thousand five hundred dollars, and security was given to Messrs.
    Horace R. Hotchkiss, Smith Tuttle and John Gillet, for the amount
    of the same, in two notes of equal amount, one payable in ten
    years, and the other in twenty years from the date thereof; signed
    by Messrs. Hyrum Smith, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon. In August
    last interest to the amount of six thousand dollars or upwards
    had accumulated on said notes, which it has not been in the power
    of the Church to pay up to the present time. The nature of this
    purchase and the situation of the Church is such, that it is
    necessary that the notes should be taken up, the interest stopped,
    and a warrantee title secured immediately; a correspondence is now
    in progress with Messrs. Hotchkiss and Co., to effect this thing,
    and bring forward a final settlement.

    But, say you, what can we do to accomplish this great and desirable
    object? Let the brethren in the eastern states who have lands which
    they wish to dispose of, so that they may remove hither, and secure
    to themselves an inheritance among the Saints either in the cities
    or farms in the vicinity, and are willing to have their lands in
    the East made over to Messrs. Hotchkiss and Co. towards the payment
    of the foregoing notes, communicate with us immediately, at this
    place, stating to us the extent and value of their property.

    Then, as soon as we shall have received communications concerning
    property, sufficient to cancel the obligations, and the necessary
    preliminaries are understood with Messrs. Hotchkiss and Co.,
    we will dispatch {436} an agent to New Haven to complete the
    negotiation, transfer your property, take up the notes and secure
    a deed; and those whose property is thus transferred can have the
    value thereof here in city lots or lands in the vicinity; and thus
    your property will prove to you as good as money, inasmuch as you
    desire to emigrate; and you will no longer be obliged to tarry
    afar off because that money is so scarce you cannot sell and get
    your pay. If there are those among you to whom God has given in
    abundance, and they desire to appropriate some portion thereof
    for the benefit of His people, for the redemption of Zion, for a
    blessing to the widows of those who have been slain for the word
    of God,--and been buried in a well,--for a sustenance to their
    fatherless children, and provide for them a habitation, they
    cannot do it more effectually than by devoting a portion of their
    sustenance toward liquidating this claim.

    To those brethren who live so far distant that they cannot send
    in their loaded teams, and yet desire to assist in building the
    Lord's house, we would say, gather yourselves together and bring
    of your substance, your silver, and gold, and apparel, and of your
    superabundance cast into the treasury of the Lord, and see if He
    will not pour you out a blessing till there is not room enough to
    receive it.

    Brethren, the blessings of the kingdom are for you, for the body of
    Christ, for all the members, and God will help those who will help
    themselves, and bless those who will bless each other, and do as
    they would be done unto. The gold and the silver is the Lord's; all
    the treasures of the earth, the flocks and the herds of the fields,
    and the cattle on the thousand hills are His; if He were hungry,
    would He crave thy food, or thirsty, would He ask thy drink? Nay!
    He would only ask that which was His own, He would feast on His own
    flocks and quench His thirst at His own springs. This God is the
    God of the Saints, He is your God and He has made you stewards of
    all that has been committed to you, and will require His own with
    usury, and will you not be faithful in a little, that you may be
    made rulers over many cities? Yes, you will, we know you will.

    The journeyings, and gatherings and buildings of the Saints are
    nothing new, and as they are expecting, looking and praying for the
    completion of the dispensation of the fullness of times, they must
    also expect that their progress will be onward, or they will be
    of no avail, for what is not of faith is sin, and can you believe
    that God will hear your prayers and bring you on your journey,
    gather you and build your houses, and you not put forth your hand
    or make one exertion to help yourselves? No. Therefore, inasmuch
    as the Saints believe that Father Abraham journed to a distant
    land at the command of the Highest, where himself and household,
    (whose household we are if we keep the commandments) might enjoy
    the fruits of their labors unmolested, {437} and worship the God
    of heaven according to the dictates of their own conscience and
    His law; that his seed afterwards gathered to Canaan, the land of
    promise; that the people of God were commanded to build a house
    where the Son of Man might have a place to lay his head, and the
    disciples be endowed with power from on high, and were with one
    accord in one place; they must also believe that this dispensation
    comprehends all the great works of all former dispensations; and
    that the children must gather as did the fathers, must build a
    house where they may be endowed, and be found together worshiping
    and doing as their fathers did when Jehovah spake, and the angels
    of heaven ministered unto them; and if these things are not in this
    generation, then we have not arrived at the dispensation of the
    fullness of times as we anticipate, and our faith and prayers are
    vain.

    Is it possible that we labor in vain and toil for nought, and that
    we shall be disappointed at the last? No! We know assuredly that
    the set time to favor Zion has come, and her sons and daughters
    shall rejoice in her glory. The time has come when the great
    Jehovah would have a resting place on earth, a habitation for
    His chosen where His law shall be revealed, and His servants be
    endowed from on high, to bring together the honest in heart from
    the four winds; where the Saints may enter the baptismal font for
    their dead relatives, so that they may be judged according to men
    in the flesh, and live according to God in the spirit, and come
    forth in the celestial kingdom; a place over which the heavenly
    messengers may watch and trouble the waters as in days of old, so
    that when the sick are put therein, they shall be made whole; a
    place wherein all the ordinances shall be made manifest, and the
    Saints shall unite in the songs of Zion, even praise, thanksgiving
    and hallelujahs to God and the Lamb, that He has wrought out their
    deliverance, and bound Satan fast in chains.

    What then shall we do? Let us all arise, and with one united and
    mighty exertion, by the strength of Israel's God, oppose the powers
    of darkness, and every being and principle that may rise up against
    us and complete the work already commenced. Let us not for a moment
    lend an ear to evil and designing men who would subvert the truth
    and blacken the character of the servant of the Most High God, by
    publishing abroad that the Prophet is enriching himself on the
    spoils of the brethren.

    When Brother Joseph stated to the general conference the amount
    and situation of the property of the Church, of which he is
    Trustee-in-Trust by the united voice of the Church, he also stated
    the amount of his own possessions on earth; and what do you think
    it was? We will tell you: his old Charley (a horse) given him in
    Kirtland, two pet deer, two old turkeys and four young ones, the
    old cow given him by a {438} brother in Missouri, his old Major,
    (a dog) his wife, children and a little household furniture; and
    this is the amount of the great possessions of that man whom God
    has called to lead His people in these last days, this is the
    sum total of the great estates, the splendid mansions and noble
    living of him who has spent a life of toil and suffering, of
    privation and hardships, of imprisonments and chains, of dungeons
    and vexatious lawsuits, and every kind of contumely and contempt
    ungodly men could heap upon him, and last of all report him as
    rolling in wealth and luxury which he had plundered from the spoils
    of those for whose good he had thus toiled and suffered. Who would
    be willing to suffer what he has suffered, and labor near twenty
    years, as he has done, for the wealth he is in possession of?

    Brethren, in view of all these things, let us be up and doing. Let
    those in the eastern states use all diligence in communicating to
    us their ability to assist in the Hotchkiss payment, being assured
    that no exertion they can make will equal what has already been
    made for them and the Church generally; and let all the Saints
    come up to the places of gathering, and with their mites and their
    abundance as God has given them in trust, help to build up the old
    waste places which have been thrown down for many generations,
    knowing that when they are completed they will belong unto the
    people of the Most High God, even the meek, the honest in heart,
    they shall possess all things, in the due time of the Lord. Be not
    covetous, but deal in righteousness, for what the Saints shall not
    possess by purchase and in righteousness they shall not possess,
    for no unrighteous thing can enter into the kingdom; therefore
    beloved brethren, deal gently, love mercy, walk humbly before God,
    and whatever your hands find to do, do it with your might, keeping
    all the commandments, and then, whether in life or in death, all
    things will be yours, whether they be temples or lands, houses or
    vineyards, baptisms or endowments, revelations or healings, all
    things will be yours, for you will be Christ's and Christ is God's.

    Brigham Young,

    Heber C. Kimball,

    Orson Pratt,

    Lyman Wight,

    John Taylor,

    Wilford Woodruff,

    George A. Smith,

    Willard Richards.

    Nauvoo, October 12, 1841.

{439}



CHAPTER XXVI.

Affairs in Kirtland and Nauvoo--Epistle of the Twelve to the Saints
in the British Islands--Orson Hyde's Prayer on the Mount of Olives,
Dedicating the Holy Land Preparatory to the Return of the Tribes of
Israel.

_Wednesday, October 20, 1841_.--The following extract of a letter from
Elder Hyde, dated Jaffa, October 20, 1841, on his way to Jerusalem.

    _Extract from Orson Hyde's Letter_.

    On my passage from Beyrut to this place (Jaffa) night before last,
    at one o'clock, as I was meditating on the deck of the vessel,
    as she was beating down against a sultry wind, a very bright
    glittering sword appeared in the heavens, about six feet in length,
    with a beautiful hilt, as plain and complete as any cut you ever
    saw; and what is still more remarkable, an arm with a perfect hand
    stretched itself out, and took hold of the hilt of the sword. The
    appearance really made my hair rise, and the flesh, as it were,
    crawl on my bones. The Arabs made a wonderful outcry at the sight.
    Allah! Allah! Allah! [O Lord, O Lord, O Lord] was their exclamation
    all over the vessel. I mention this because you know there is a
    commandment of God for me, which says, "Unto you it shall be given
    to know the signs of the times, and the sign of the coming of the
    Son of Man."

    Yours in Christ,

    Orson Hyde.

_Saturday, 23_.--I attended the city council.

    _Minutes of Conference held at Lima_.

    Lima [Adams county, Illinois] conference convened pursuant to
    previous appointment. Elders Brigham Young, John Taylor, and
    Willard {440} Richards, of the Twelve Apostles, were in attendance.
    Elder Brigham Young was unanimously chosen president, and James C.
    Snow, clerk of the conference.

    President Young then made some preliminary remarks, setting forth
    and explaining the object of the meeting; followed by President
    Isaac Morley. Elder James C. Snow then represented the branch of
    the Church at Lima, consisting of 424 members, including 9 High
    Priests, 32 Elders, 4 Priests, 5 Teachers, and 4 Deacons, mostly in
    good standing.

    President Young, Elders Taylor and Richards, then made some very
    appropriate remarks, showing and proving the absolute necessity
    of finishing and completing the House of the Lord now building in
    Nauvoo, in preference to anything else that can be done, either by
    mental or physical exertion, in spreading light, knowledge, and
    intelligence among the nations of the earth.

    Conference adjourned till tomorrow, ten o'clock.

    In the evening President Morley met with his counselors together
    with President Young, Elders Taylor, and Richards, and brethren
    of the Lima branch, for the purpose of entering into certain
    resolutions necessary, in order to become more active in forwarding
    the work on the House of the Lord.

    After much deliberation, it was moved and seconded, that all those
    who are willing to consecrate one tenth of their time and property
    to the building of the temple at Nauvoo, under the superintendence
    of President Morley and counselors, to signify it by the uplifted
    hands; when the motion was carried unanimously.

    Sunday morning, at ten o'clock conference met pursuant to
    adjournment.

    Elder John Taylor delivered an address, upon the object of Christ's
    mission into this world, the resurrection and redemption of the
    Saints, and pointed out very clearly the course to be pursued in
    order to become the sons of God, through the ordinances of the
    gospel, that the Saints may, at last, be exalted at the right hand
    of God, to dwell with Him eternally in the heavens.

    After an intermission of one hour, the sacrament was administered
    by President Young and Elder Richards. The minutes of the
    conference were then read and accepted.

    President Young made some very just remarks on the priesthood,
    authority, and calling.

    Conference adjourned _sine die_.

    Benediction by President Morley.

    Brigham Young, President,

    James C. Snow, Clerk.

    {441} _Extract of a Letter from Parley P. Pratt--Emigration of
    Saints, and Status of the Work in England_.

    Manchester, England.

    On the 20th of September, the ship _Tyrean_ sailed from Liverpool
    for New Orleans, under a charter of the Latter-day Saints; she had
    upwards of two hundred Saints on board, with Elder Joseph Fielding
    at their head. By chartering [the vessel] we saved the company [of
    Saints] at least 500 or 600 dollars. The splendid new ship _Chaos_,
    1,200 tons burthen, will sail on the 5th of November, under our
    charter. She will have from one to two hundred Saints on board,
    with Patriarch Peter Melling at their head.

    The Saints in this country are generally rejoicing, and filled with
    the testimony of Jesus. Great zeal is manifested by the officers in
    general, of whom there are probably more than a thousand. We are
    increasing in numbers, and in gifts and blessings. New branches of
    the Church are rising in many places, and great additions made to
    the old ones. Manchester and vicinity has poured forth a stream of
    emigration for the last eighteen months, and still we numbered at
    our conference, two weeks ago, nearly sixteen hundred members, and
    between one and two hundred officers; all these within one hour's
    journey of Manchester.

    There has been a general time of pruning; we have cut off upwards
    of one hundred members from this conference in a few months; this
    causes the young and tender branches to grow with double vigor.

_Thursday, 28_.

    _Copy of a Letter of Attorney from Joseph Smith, "Sole Trustee in
    Trust for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," to
    Reuben McBride, of Kirtland, Ohio_.

    Know all men by these presents, that I, Joseph Smith, of Nauvoo,
    Hancock county, and State of Illinois, "sole trustee in trust
    for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," have
    made, constituted and appointed, and by these presents do make,
    constitute, and appoint, Reuben McBride, of Kirtland, Lake county,
    and state of Ohio, my true and lawful attorney for me and in my
    name, and for my use as "sole trustee in trust for the Church
    of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," to ask, demand, sue for,
    recover, and receive all such sum or sums of money, debts, goods,
    wares, and other demands which are or shall be due, owing, payable,
    or belonging to me, as trustee in trust as aforesaid, by any manner
    or means whatsoever; also, to dispose of in my name, to grant,
    bargain, sell, release, and confirm all or any part of my real
    estate as trustee in trust as aforesaid, in and about Kirtland,
    Lake county, and state of Ohio, and throughout any of the northern
    and {442} eastern states, and to receive all such sum or sums of
    money accruing therefrom, for me and for my use as sole trustee
    in trust for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and
    to take up the power of attorney which I gave to Oliver Granger,
    and all the papers and obligations of every description specified
    therein, or in his possession by virtue thereof, and to settle the
    same in my name, for me and for my use as above described; and I,
    as trustee in trust as aforesaid, hereby give and grant unto the
    said Reuben McBride, my attorney, full power and authority in and
    about the premises, to have, use, and take all lawful ways and
    means in my name for the purposes aforesaid, and upon the receipt
    of any such debts, dues, or sums of money (as the case may be),
    acquittances, or other sufficient discharges, for me and in my name
    as aforesaid Trustee, to make and give, and generally to do all
    other acts and things in the law whatsoever needful and necessary
    to be done, in the before mentioned places, for me and in my name
    as aforesaid Trustee, to do, execute, and perform, as fully and to
    all intents and purposes, as I might or could do, if personally
    present. Hereby ratifying all and whatsoever my said attorney
    shall, in the place above specified, by virtue hereof.

    In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and seal this 28th
    day of October, 1841.

    Joseph Smith, (L. S.)

    Witness: John Taylor, John S. Fullmer.

_Friday, 29_.--Those of the Twelve Apostles who were in Nauvoo, met in
council.

_Saturday, 30_.--I attended the city council, and spoke against the
council remitting a fine assessed against John Eagle by a jury of
twelve men, considering that the jury might be as sensible men as any
of the city council, and I asked the council not to remit the fine.

Lyman Wight, Willard Richards, and Wilford Woodruff were elected
councilors, and Hiram Kimball and George W. Harris, Aldermen.

In obedience to an order from the mayor, I called out two companies of
the Nauvoo Legion, and removed a grog shop kept by Pulaski S. Cahoon,
which had been declared a nuisance by the city council.

_Sunday, 31_.--I was in council with the brethren at brother Hyrum's
office.

{443} Attended a council with the Twelve Apostles. Benjamin Winchester
being present, complained that he had been neglected and misrepresented
by the Elders, and manifested a contentious spirit. I gave him a
severe reproof, telling him of his folly and vanity, and showing him
that the principles which he suffered to control him would lead him
to destruction. I counseled him to change his course, govern his
disposition, and quit his tale-bearing and slandering his brethren.

I instructed the council on many principles pertaining to the gathering
of the nations, the wickedness and downfall of this generation, &c.

After having received the following minutes--"A conference was held at
Kirtland, Ohio, Oct. 2, 1841. Almon W. Babbitt, president, and William
W. Phelps, clerk. Resolved, that Thomas Burdick, Bishop of Kirtland,
and his counselors, be constituted a company to establish a press in
Kirtland, and publish a religious paper, entitled _The Olive Leaf_, and
that the Saints adjacent be solicited to carry the above resolution
into effect"--my brother Hyrum wrote to the brethren in Kirtland, of
which the following is an extract--

    _Excerpt of Hyrum Smith's Letter to the Saints in
    Kirtland--Disapproving of Certain Plans for Building up Kirtland_.

    All the Saints that dwell in that land are commanded to come away,
    for this is "Thus saith the Lord;" therefore pay out no moneys,
    nor properties for houses, nor lands in that country, for if you
    do you will lose them, for the time shall come, that you shall not
    possess them in peace, but shall be scourged with a sore scourge;
    yet your children may possess them, but not until many years shall
    pass away; and as to the organization of that branch of the Church,
    it is not according to the Spirit and will of God; and as to the
    designs of the leading members of that branch relative to the
    printing press, and the ordaining of Elders, and sending out Elders
    to beg for the poor, are not according to the will of God; and in
    these things they shall not prosper, for they have neglected the
    House of the Lord, the baptismal font, in this place, wherein their
    dead may be redeemed, and the key of knowledge that unfolds the
    dispensation of the fullness of times may be turned, and the {444}
    mysteries of God be unfolded, upon which their salvation, and the
    salvation of the world, and the redemption of their dead depends;
    for "thus saith the Lord," there shall not be a general assembly
    for a general conference assembled together until the House of
    the Lord and the baptismal font shall be finished; and if we are
    not diligent the Church shall be rejected, and their dead also,
    saith the Lord. "Therefore, dear brethren, any proceedings of the
    Saints otherwise than to put forth their hands with their might to
    do this work, is not according to the will of God, and shall not
    prosper; therefore, tarry not in any place whatever, but come forth
    unto this place from all the world, until it is filled up, and
    polished, and sanctified according to my word, saith the Lord. Come
    ye forth from the ends of the earth, that I may hide you from mine
    indignation that shall scourge the wicked, and then I will send
    forth and build up Kirtland, and it shall be polished and refined
    according to my word; therefore your doings and your organizations
    and designs in printing, or any of your councils, are not of me,
    saith the Lord, even so. Amen."

    Hyrum Smith,

    Patriarch for the whole Church.

_Monday, November 1_.--I attended the city council, spoke and acted
on many local matters, and contended at great length against paying
the owner of a city nuisance, damages sustained by the removal of that
nuisance. [1]

{445} Sidney Rigdon resigned his seat in the city council, on account
of ill health.

_Tuesday, 2_.--I executed letters today revoking the power of attorney
given to Almon W. Babbitt.

_Saturday, 6_.--Wilford Woodruff took the oath as a councilor in the
city council.

_Sunday, 7_.--Elder William O. Clark preached about two hours,
reproving the Saints for a lack of sanctity, and a want of holy living,
enjoining sanctity, solemnity, and temperance in the extreme, in the
rigid sectarian style.

[Sidenote: Reproof of William O. Clark.]

I reproved him as Pharisaical and hypocritical and not edifying the
people; and showed the Saints what temperance, faith, virtue, charity,
and truth were. I charged the Saints not to follow the example of the
adversary in accusing the brethren, and said, "If you do not accuse
each other, God will not accuse you. If you have no accuser you will
enter heaven, and if you will follow the revelations and instructions
which God gives you through me, I will take you into heaven as my back
load. If you will not accuse me, I will not accuse you. If you will
throw a cloak of charity over my sins, I will over yours--for charity
covereth a multitude of sins. What many people call sin is not sin; I
do many things to break down superstition, and I will break it down;" I
referred to the curse of Ham for laughing at Noah, while in his wine,
but doing no harm. Noah was a righteous man, and yet he drank wine
and became intoxicated; the Lord did not forsake him in consequence
thereof, for he retained all the power of his priesthood, and when he
was accused by Canaan, he cursed him by the priesthood which he held,
and the Lord had respect {446} to his word, and the priesthood which
he held, notwithstanding he was drunk, and the curse remains upon the
posterity of Canaan until the present day.

In the p. m., I attended a council of the Elders at my council room,
relative to some affairs in which my brother William was interested.

[Sidenote: Dedication of the Baptismal Font.]

_Monday, 8_.--At five o'clock p. m., I attended the dedication of
the baptismal font in the Lord's House. President Brigham Young was
spokesman.

The baptismal font is situated in the center of the basement room,
under the main hall of the Temple; it is constructed of pine timber,
and put together of staves tongued and grooved, oval shaped, sixteen
feet long east and west, and twelve feet wide, seven feet high from
the foundation, the basin four feet deep, the moulding of the cap and
base are formed of beautiful carved work in antique style. The sides
are finished with panel work. A flight of stairs in the north and south
sides lead up and down into the basin, guarded by side railing.

The font stands upon twelve oxen, four on each side, and two at each
end, their heads, shoulders, and fore legs projecting out from under
the font; they are carved out of pine plank, glued together, and copied
after the most beautiful five-year-old steer that could be found in the
country, and they are an excellent striking likeness of the original;
the horns were formed after the most perfect horn that could be
procured.

The oxen and ornamental mouldings of the font were carved by Elder
Elijah Fordham, from the city of New York, which occupied eight months
of time. The font was enclosed by a temporary frame building sided up
with split oak clapboards, with a roof of the same material, and was
so low that the timbers of the first story were laid above it. The
water was supplied from a well thirty feet deep in the east end of the
basement.

This font was built for the baptisms for the dead until {447} the
Temple shall be finished, when a more durable one will supply its place.

I received a letter from N. K. Whitney, stating that he had purchased
$5,000 worth of goods for me; and that he should visit Kirtland before
his return home.

Up to this period a series of storms and earthquakes have desolated
parts of the two Sicilies.

A second English edition of the Saints' hymn book has been issued by
Elder Parley P. Pratt.

A great part of Vicksburg, Mississippi, has been consumed by fire.

_Saturday, 13_.--I attended the city council, and moved that the mayor
and recorder of the city receive each one hundred dollars per annum for
their services, which became a law.

I also presented a bill for "An ordinance concerning vagrants and
disorderly persons," which passed into an ordinance as follows--

    _An Ordinance Concerning Vagrants and Disorderly Persons_.

    Be it ordained by the city council of the city of Nauvoo, that
    all vagrants, idle, or disorderly persons; persons found drunk in
    or about the streets; all suspicious persons; persons who have no
    fixed place of residence, or visible means of support, or cannot
    give a good account of themselves; persons guilty of profane and
    indecent language or behavior; persons guilty of using indecent,
    impertinent, or unbecoming language towards any city officer when
    in the discharge of his duty, or of menacing, threatening or
    otherwise obstructing said officer, shall on conviction thereof
    before the mayor or municipal court, be required to enter into
    security for good behavior for a reasonable time, and indemnify the
    corporation against any charge, and in case of refusal or inability
    to give security, they shall be confined to labor for a time not
    exceeding ninety days, or be fined in any sum not exceeding five
    hundred dollars, or be imprisoned not exceeding six months or all,
    [i. e. or both imprisonment and fine] at the discretion of said
    mayor or court.

I also presented a bill for "An ordinance in relation to appeals,"
which passed unanimously.

I also argued before the council the right of taxation, but {448} that
the expense of the city did not require it at present.

_Sunday, 14_.--I preached to a large congregation at the Temple.

Nine of the Twelve Apostles met in council, to prepare an epistle to
the Saints in Europe.

_Monday, 15_.

    _An Epistle of the Twelve Apostles to the Saints Scattered Abroad
    in England, Scotland, Ireland, Wales, the Isle of Man, and the
    Eastern Continent, Greeting_:

    Beloved Brethren:--We rejoice and thank our Heavenly Father daily
    in your behalf, that we hear of your faithfulness and diligence in
    the great work unto which you have been called, by the Holy Spirit,
    through the voice of the servants of the Most High, who have been,
    and are now amongst you, for the purpose of instructing you in
    those principles which are calculated to prepare the children of
    men for the renovation of the earth, and the restitution of all
    things spoken by the Prophets.

    Several months have passed away, since we bid adieu to our brethren
    and sisters on the islands of the sea, and passed over the great
    deep to our homes, our kindred, the bosom of the Church, and the
    stakes of Zion: but neither time nor distance can efface from our
    memories the many expressions of kindness which we have heard from
    your lips and experienced from your hands, which have so often
    ministered to our necessities, while we were wandering in your
    midst, like our Master, having no place to lay our heads, only as
    furnished by your liberality and benevolence; and it is a subject
    of no small consolation to us that we have this testimony of so
    many of you, that you are the disciples of the Lord Jesus; [2] and
    we give you our warmest thanks, and our blessing, that you have not
    only ministered unto us, but that you continue to minister to our
    brethren who are still laboring amongst you, for which an hundred
    fold shall be returned unto your bosoms.

    After parting with the Saints in Liverpool, and sailing thirty
    days, much of the time against head winds, with rough seas, which
    produced much sea sickness among the brethren and sisters who
    accompanied us, we arrived in the city of New York, where we were
    received by the brethren with open hearts, and by whom we were
    entertained most cordially some days, till we were rested from the
    fatigues of the ship: we were then assisted on our journey, and
    taking different routes, and {449} visiting many of the churches in
    different states, we have all safely arrived in this city.

    In our travels in this land, we have discovered a growing interest
    among the people generally, in the great work of the Lord.
    Prejudice is giving way to intelligence; darkness to light; and
    multitudes are making the important discovery that error is abroad
    in the earth, and that the signs of the times proclaim some mighty
    revolution among the nations. The cry is from all quarters, send us
    Elders to instruct us in the principles of your religion, that we
    may know why it is that you are had in derision by the multitude,
    more than other professors are. Teach us of your principles and
    your doctrines, and if we find them true we will embrace them.

    The Saints are growing in faith, and the intelligence of heaven
    is flowing into their understanding, for the Spirit of the Lord
    is with them, and the Holy Ghost is instructing them in things to
    come. The spirit of union is increasing, and they are exerting
    themselves to come up to the gathering of the faithful, to build up
    the waste places and establish the stakes of Zion.

    Since our arrival in this place there has been one special and one
    general conference of the Church, and the Twelve have been called
    to tarry at home for a season, and stand in their lot next to the
    First Presidency, and assist in counseling the brethren, and in the
    settling of immigrants, &c.; and the first great object before us,
    and the Saints generally, is to help forward the completion of the
    Temple and the Nauvoo House--buildings which are now in progress
    according to the revelations, and which must be completed to secure
    the salvation of the Church in the last days; for God requires
    of His Saints to build Him a house wherein his servants may be
    instructed, and endowed with power from on high, to prepare them to
    go forth among the nations, and proclaim the fullness of the Gospel
    for the last time, and bind up the law, and seal up the testimony,
    leaving this generation without excuse, and the earth prepared for
    the judgments which will follow. In this house all the ordinances
    will be made manifest, and many things will be shown forth, which
    have been hid from generation to generation.

    The set time to favor the stakes of Zion is at hand, and soon the
    kings and the queens, the princes and the nobles, the rich and the
    honorable of the earth will come up hither to visit the Temple of
    our God, and to inquire concerning His strange work; and as kings
    are to become nursing fathers, and queens nursing mothers in the
    habitations of the righteous, it is right to render honor to whom
    honor is due; and therefore expedient that such, as well as the
    Saints, should have a comfortable house for boarding and lodging
    when they come hither, and it is according to the revelations that
    such a house should be built.

    {450} The foundations of this house, and also of the Temple,
    are laid; and the walls of the basement stories of each nearly
    completed; and the finishing of the whole is depending on the
    exertions of the Saints. Every Saint on earth is equally interested
    in these things, and all are under equal obligations to do all in
    their power to complete the buildings by their faith, and by their
    prayers, with their thousands and their mites, their gold and their
    silver, their copper and their zinc, their goods and their labors,
    until the top stone is laid with shoutings, and the place is
    prepared to be filled with the glory of the Highest; and if there
    are those among you who have more than they need for the gathering,
    and for assisting the destitute who desire to gather with them,
    they cannot make a more acceptable offering unto the Lord, than by
    appropriating towards the building of His Temple.

    He that believeth shall not make haste, but let all the Saints who
    desire to keep the commandments of heaven and work righteousness,
    come to the place of gathering as soon as circumstances will
    permit. It is by united efforts that great things are accomplished,
    and while the Saints are scattered to the four winds, they cannot
    be united in action, if they are in spirit; they cannot all build
    at one city, or lift at one stone of the great Temple, though
    their hearts may all desire the same thing. We would not press the
    subject of the gathering upon you, for we know your hearts, and
    your means; and so far as means fail, let patience have its perfect
    work in your souls, for in due time you shall be delivered, if you
    faint not.

    We are not altogether ignorant of the increase of difficulty among
    the laboring classes in England since our departure through the
    stoppage of factories and similar occurrences, and we would counsel
    those who have, to impart unto those who have not, and cannot
    obtain; remembering that he who giveth unto the poor lendeth unto
    the Lord, and he shall receive in return four fold.

    The idler shall not eat the bread of the laborer; neither must he
    starve who would [labor] but cannot find employment. Inasmuch as ye
    desire the fullness of the earth, let not the cries of the widow,
    the fatherless and the beggar ascend to heaven, or salute your ears
    in vain, but follow the example we have set before you, and give
    liberally of your abundance, even if it be but a penny, and it
    shall be returned unto you. Good measure pressed down and running
    over, shall the Lord return into your store house.

    Cultivate the spirit of patience, long-suffering, forbearance and
    charity among yourselves, and ever be as unwilling to believe
    an evil report about a brother or a sister as if it were about
    yourself, and as you dislike to be accused, be slow to accuse the
    brethren, for the measure you mete shall be measured to you again,
    and the Judge condemneth no man who is not accused.

    {451} Keep all the commandments, nothing fearing, nothing doubting,
    for this is virtue, this is wisdom, and the wise, the virtuous
    and the meek shall inherit the earth and the fullness thereof. In
    all things follow the counsel which you shall receive from the
    president and council who are among you; and inasmuch as you uphold
    Elders Pratt, Richards and Snow by the prayer of faith, you shall
    receive right counsel.

    Remember that those whom John saw on Mount Zion were such as had
    come up through great tribulation; and do not imagine that you can
    ever constitute a part of that number without sharing a part of
    their trials. You must necessarily pass through perils and trials,
    and temptations and afflictions by sea and land in your journeyings
    hither, and if you cannot settle it in your hearts to endure unto
    the end as good soldiers, you may as well remain where you are
    to be destroyed, as to suffer all the privations and hardships
    you will be obliged to suffer before the walls of Zion shall be
    built, no more to be thrown down, and after all to turn away and be
    destroyed.

    The ancient prophet has said, they shall wear out the Saints of the
    Most High. This has already been fulfilled to some extent, for many
    through the abundance of their persecutions have become exhausted,
    and laid their bodies down to rest, to rise no more till the morn
    of the first resurrection; and although the people of these states
    are at peace with us, yet there are those who would gladly wear
    out and destroy the weak in faith, through the influence of their
    foolish lies. When you arrive on our shores, and while sailing up
    our rivers, you need not be surprised if your ears are saluted by
    the false and filthy language of wicked and designing men who are
    ever ready to speak evil of the things they understand not, and who
    would gladly blast the character of the Prophet of the Most High
    God, and all connected with him, with their foul anathemas, beyond
    anything you ever thought of. We would not dishearten you, neither
    would we have you ignorant of the worst that awaits the righteous.

    If the Saints are not prepared to rejoice and be glad when they
    hear the name of the Prophet and their own name cast out as evil,
    as gluttonous, wine-bibber, friend of publicans and sinners,
    Beelzebub, thief, robber and murderer, they are not prepared for
    the gathering. The wheat and tares must grow together till the
    harvest; at the harvest the wheat is gathered together into the
    threshing floor, so with the Saints--the stakes are the threshing
    floor. Here they will be threshed with all sorts of difficulties,
    trials, afflictions and everything to mar their peace, which they
    can imagine, and thousands which they cannot imagine, but he that
    endures the threshing till all the chaff, superstition, folly and
    unbelief are pounded out of him, and does not suffer himself to
    be blown away as chaff by the foul blast of slander, but endures
    faithfully {452} to the end, shall be saved. If you are prepared
    for all these things; if you choose rather to suffer afflictions
    with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
    little moment, come up hither; come direct to New Orleans, and
    up the Mississippi river, for the expense is so much less, and
    the convenience of water navigation is so much greater than it is
    by Montreal, New York or Philadelphia, that it is wisdom for the
    Saints to make New Orleans their general established port, and
    be sure to start at such times that they may arrive here during
    the cold months, for the change from the cold climate of England
    to this place in the hot season, is too great for the health of
    immigrants, till there is more faith in the Church.

    In this region of country there are thousands and millions of
    acres of beautiful prairie unoccupied, which can be procured on
    reasonable terms, and we will hail the time with joy when these
    unoccupied lands shall be turned into fruitful fields, and the
    hands of those who are now idle for want of employment shall be
    engaged in the cultivation of the soil.

    When the brethren arrive they will do well to call on some of the
    Twelve, inasmuch as they desire counsel, for by so doing they may
    escape the influence of designing men who have crept in unawares,
    and would willingly subvert the truth by conniving to their own
    advantage, if they have the opportunity.

    The Church has commenced a new city twenty miles below this, and
    one mile below Warsaw, called Warren, where many city lots and
    farms in the vicinity can be had on reasonable terms; and it will
    be wisdom for many of the brethren to stop at that place, for the
    opportunity for erecting temporary buildings will be greater than
    at this place, also the chance for providing food will be superior
    to those who wish to labor for it.

    Warsaw is at the foot of the Des Moines Rapids, and one of the best
    locations for mercantile purposes there is in this western country.

    So far as the brethren have the means they will do well to come
    prepared with a variety of mechanical tools according to their
    professions, such as carpenters, joiners, cabinet-makers, hatters,
    coopers, masons, printers, binders, tanners, curriers, &c., and
    all sorts of manufactory and foundry implements convenient for
    transportation, so that when they arrive they may be prepared to
    establish themselves in business, and give employment to spinners,
    weavers, moulders, smelters and journeymen of every description;
    for all sorts of woollens, cottons, hardware, &c., will find a
    ready market in new countries, and a great field is now open to the
    capitalists in this vicinity, even though the capital be small,
    and we would urge the importance of the immediate establishment of
    all kinds of manufactories among us, as well for the {453} best
    interests of the individuals concerned, as for the Church generally.

    Cities cannot be built without houses, houses cannot be built
    without materials, or occupied without inhabitants, the inhabitants
    cannot exist without food and clothing; food and clothing cannot
    be had without planting, sowing, and manufacturing, so that Zion
    and her stores cannot be built without means, without industry,
    without manufacturing establishments unless the windows of heaven
    were opened, and cities and their appendages were rained down among
    us. But this we do not expect until the new Jerusalem descends,
    and that will be some time hence; therefore it is necessary and
    according to godliness and the plan of salvation in these last
    days, that the brethren should see to all these things, and clothe
    and adorn themselves with the labor of their own hands, build
    houses and inhabit them, plant vineyards and eat the fruit thereof.

    Brethren, pray for us and the First Presidency, the leader of the
    people, even Joseph, that his life and health may be precious in
    the sight of heaven, till he has finished the work which he has
    commenced: and for the Elders of Israel, that every man may be
    faithful in his calling, the whole household of faith, and all
    subjects of prayer.

    Brethren, farewell; may the blessings of heaven and earth be
    multiplied unto you in spirit and in body, in basket and in store,
    in the field and in the shop, on the land and on the sea, in the
    house and by the way, and in all situations and circumstances,
    until you shall stand on Mount Zion, and enter the celestial city;
    in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

    Brigham Young,

    Heber C. Kimball.

    Orson Pratt,

    William Smith,

    Lyman Wight,

    Wilford Woodruff,

    John Taylor,

    Geo. A. Smith,

    Willard Richards,

    Nauvoo, Hancock County, Illinois, Nov. 15, 1841.

The greater part of the city of St. John's, New Brunswick, and a large
quantity of shipping, destroyed by fire.

_Wednesday, 17_.--Elders Brigham Young and Willard Richards went to La
Harpe.

_Thursday, 18_.

    _Minutes of a Meeting at Ramus, Illinois--Alanson Brown, et al.
    Disfellowshiped_.

    Proceedings of a meeting of the Church of Jesus Christ of
    Latter-day {454} Saints, held at Ramus, November 18, 1841, opened
    by singing and prayer by Elder Brigham Young. The object of the
    meeting was then stated by the president, which was for the purpose
    of taking into consideration the cases of Alanson Brown, James B.
    T. Page and William H. Edwards, who stand indicted for larceny, &c.

    After the evidence was brought forward, it was unanimously
    resolved, that said persons be expelled from the Church.
    Appropriate remarks for the occasion were then made by Elders
    Young, Richards, Savage, Gurley, and others.

    A charge was then preferred against Thomas S. Edwards for assault
    and battery, with evidence that a warrant was issued for his
    apprehension, and against William W. Edwards for being accessory
    to the same. Unanimously resolved, that Thomas S. Edwards also be
    expelled from the Church; and that the proceedings of this meeting
    be published in the _Times and Seasons_.

    Joel H. Johnson, President.

    Joseph E. Johnson, Church Recorder.

_Saturday, 20_.--Seven of the Twelve Apostles met in council at the
house of President Young, on the subject of the _Times and Seasons_;
they not being satisfied with the manner in which Gustavus Hills
had conducted the editorial department since the death of Robert B.
Thompson.

_Sunday, 21_.--My brother Hyrum and Elder John Taylor preached.

[Sidenote: Baptisms for the Dead.]

The Twelve met in council at President Young's, and at four o'clock,
repaired to the baptismal font in the basement of the Temple. Elders
Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and John Taylor baptized about forty
persons for the dead. Elder Willard Richards, Wilford Woodruff and
George A. Smith confirming. These were the first baptisms for the dead
in the font.

_Monday, 22_.--The following letter from Elder Orson Hyde, is from the
_Millennial Star_.

    _Elder Orson Hyde's Letter--His Prayer of Dedication on the Mount
    of Olives_.

    Alexandria, Nov. 22, 1841.

    Dear Brother Pratt:--A few minutes now offer for me to write, and I
    improve them in writing to you.

    {455} I have only time to say that I have seen Jerusalem precisely
    according to the vision which I had. I saw no one with me in the
    vision; and although Elder Page was appointed to accompany me
    there, yet I found myself there alone.

    The Lord knows that I have had a hard time, and suffered much,
    but I have great reason to thank Him that I enjoy good health at
    present, and have a prospect before me of soon going to a civilized
    country, where I shall see no more turbans or camels. The heat is
    most oppressive, and has been all through Syria.

    I have not time to tell you how many days I have been at sea,
    without food, or how many snails I have eaten; but if I had had
    plenty of them, I should have done very well. All this is contained
    in a former letter to you written from Jaffa.

    I have been at Cairo, on the Nile, because I could not get
    a passage direct. Syria is in a dreadful state--a war of
    extermination is going on between the Druses and Catholics. At the
    time I was at Beyroot, a battle was fought in the mountains of
    Lebanon, near that place, and about 800 killed. Robberies, thefts
    and murders are daily being committed. It is no uncommon thing to
    find persons in the streets without heads. An English officer, in
    going from St. Jean D'Acre to Beyroot, found ten persons murdered
    in the street, and was himself taken prisoner, but was rescued by
    the timely interference of the pasha. The particulars of all these
    things are contained in a former letter.

    An American traveler, by the name of Gager, who was a licensed
    minister of the Congregational or Presbyterian church, left
    Jerusalem in company with me. He was very unwell with the jaundice
    when we left, and at Damietta, we had to perform six days
    quarantine before we ascended the Nile. On our passage up, he was
    taken very ill with a fever, and became helpless. I waited and
    tended upon him as well as our circumstances would allow; and when
    we landed at Bulack, I got four men to take him to the American
    consuls at Cairo, on a litter; I also took all his baggage there,
    and assisted in putting him upon a good bed--employed a good
    faithful Arabian nurse, and the English doctor. After the physician
    had examined him, he told me that he was very low with a typhus
    fever, and that it would be doubtful whether he recovered. Under
    these circumstances I left him to obtain a passage to this place.
    After I had gone on board a boat, and was just about pushing off,
    a letter came from the doctor, stating that poor Mr. Gager died in
    about two hours after I left him. He told me before we arrived at
    Cairo that he was twenty-seven years of age, and his friends lived
    in Norwich, Connecticut, near New London, I think. There are many
    particulars concerning his death, which would be interesting to his
    friends, but I have no time to write them now.

    {456} On Sunday morning, October 24, a good while before day, I
    arose from sleep, and went out of the city as soon as the gates
    were opened, crossed the brook Kedron, and went upon the Mount of
    Olives, and there, in solemn silence, with pen, ink, and paper,
    just as I saw in the vision, offered up the following prayer to Him
    who lives forever and ever--

    _Prayer of Orson Hyde on the Mount of Olives_.

    "O Thou! who art from everlasting to everlasting, eternally and
    unchangeably the same, even the God who rules in the heavens
    above, and controls the destinies of men on the earth, wilt Thou
    not condescend, through thine infinite goodness and royal favor,
    to listen to the prayer of Thy servant which he this day offers
    up unto Thee in the name of Thy holy child Jesus, upon this land,
    where the Son of Righteousness set in blood, and thine Anointed One
    expired.

    "Be pleased, O Lord, to forgive all the follies, weaknesses,
    vanities, and sins of Thy servant, and strengthen him to resist all
    future temptations. Give him prudence and discernment that he may
    avoid the evil, and a heart to choose the good; give him fortitude
    to bear up under trying and adverse circumstances, and grace to
    endure all things for Thy name's sake, until the end shall come,
    when all the Saints shall rest in peace."

    Now, O Lord! Thy servant has been obedient to the heavenly
    vision which Thou gavest him in his native land; and under the
    shadow of Thine outstretched arm, he has safely arrived in this
    place to dedicate and consecrate this land unto Thee, for the
    gathering together of Judah's scattered remnants, according to the
    predictions of the holy Prophets--for the building up of Jerusalem
    again after it has been trodden down by the Gentiles so long, and
    for rearing a Temple in honor of Thy name. Everlasting thanks be
    ascribed unto Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that Thou
    hast preserved Thy servant from the dangers of the seas, and from
    the plague and pestilence which have caused the land to mourn. The
    violence of man has also been restrained, and Thy providential care
    by night and by day has been exercised over Thine unworthy servant.
    Accept, therefore, O Lord, the tribute of a grateful heart for all
    past favors, and be pleased to continue Thy kindness and mercy
    towards a needy worm of the dust.

    "O Thou, Who didst covenant with Abraham, Thy friend, and Who didst
    renew that covenant with Isaac, and confirm the same with Jacob
    with an oath, that Thou wouldst not only give them this land for
    an everlasting inheritance, but that Thou wouldst also remember
    their seed forever. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob have long since
    closed their eyes {457} in death, and made the grave their mansion.
    Their children are scattered and dispersed abroad among the nations
    of the Gentiles like sheep that have no shepherd, and are still
    looking forward for the fulfillment of those promises which Thou
    didst make concerning them; and even this land, which once poured
    forth nature's richest bounty, and flowed, as it were, with milk
    and honey, has, to a certain extent, been smitten with barrenness
    and sterility since it drank from murderous hands the blood of Him
    who never sinned.

    "Grant, therefore, O Lord, in the name of Thy well-beloved Son,
    Jesus Christ, to remove the barrenness and sterility of this land,
    and let springs of living water break forth to water its thirsty
    soil. Let the vine and olive produce in their strength, and the
    fig-tree bloom and flourish. Let the land become abundantly
    fruitful when possessed by its rightful heirs; let it again flow
    with plenty to feed the returning prodigals who come home with a
    spirit of grace and supplication; upon it let the clouds distil
    virtue and richness, and let the fields smile with plenty. Let
    the flocks and the herds greatly increase and multiply upon the
    mountains and the hills; and let Thy great kindness conquer and
    subdue the unbelief of Thy people. Do Thou take from them their
    stony heart, and give them a heart of flesh; and may the Sun of Thy
    favor dispel the cold mists of darkness which have beclouded their
    atmosphere. Incline them to gather in upon this land according
    to Thy word. Let them come like clouds and like doves to their
    windows. Let the large ships of the nations bring them from the
    distant isles; and let kings become their nursing fathers, and
    queens with motherly fondness wipe the tear of sorrow from their
    eye.

    "Thou, O Lord, did once move upon the heart of Cyrus to show favor
    unto Jerusalem and her children. Do Thou now also be pleased to
    inspire the hearts of kings and the powers of the earth to look
    with a friendly eye towards this place, and with a desire to see
    Thy righteous purposes executed in relation thereto. Let them
    know that it is Thy good pleasure to restore the kingdom unto
    Israel--raise up Jerusalem as its capital, and constitute her
    people a distinct nation and government, with David Thy servant,
    even a descendant from the loins of ancient David to be their king.

    "Let that nation or that people who shall take an active part in
    behalf of Abraham's children, and in the raising up of Jerusalem,
    find favor in Thy sight. Let not their enemies prevail against
    them, neither let pestilence or famine overcome them, but let the
    glory of Israel overshadow them, and the power of the Highest
    protect them; while that nation or kingdom that will not serve Thee
    in this glorious work must perish, according to Thy word--Yea,
    those nations shall be utterly wasted."

    {458} "Though Thy servant is now far from his home, and from the
    land bedewed with his earliest tear, yet he remembers, O Lord, his
    friends who are there, and family, whom for Thy sake he has left.
    Though poverty and privation be our earthly lot, yet ah! do Thou
    richly endow us with an inheritance where moth and rust do not
    corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal.

    "The hands that have fed, clothed, or shown favor unto the family
    of Thy servant in his absence, or that shall hereafter do so, let
    them not lose their reward, but let a special blessing rest upon
    them, and in Thy kingdom let them have an inheritance when Thou
    shalt come to be glorified in this society.

    "Do Thou also look with favor upon all those through whose
    liberality I have been enabled to come to this land; and in the
    day when Thou shalt reward all people according to their works,
    let these also not be passed by or forgotten, but in time let
    them be in readiness to enjoy the glory of those mansions which
    Jesus has gone to prepare. Particularly do Thou bless the stranger
    in Philadelphia, whom I never saw, but who sent me gold, with a
    request that I should pray for him in Jerusalem. Now, O Lord, let
    blessings come upon him from an unexpected quarter, and let his
    basket be filled, and his storehouse abound with plenty, and let
    not the good things of the earth be his only portion, but let him
    be found among those to whom it shall be said, 'Thou hast been
    faithful over a few things, and I will make thee ruler over many.'

    "O my Father in heaven! I now ask Thee in the name of Jesus to
    remember Zion, with all her Stakes, and with all her assemblies.
    She has been grievously afflicted and smitten; she has mourned;
    she has wept; her enemies have triumphed, and have said, 'Ah,
    where is thy God?' Her Priests and Prophets have groaned in chains
    and fetters within the gloomy walls of prisons, while many were
    slain, and now sleep in the arms of death. How long, O Lord, shall
    iniquity triumph, and sin go unpunished?

    "Do Thou arise in the majesty of Thy strength, and make bare Thine
    arm in behalf of Thy people. Redress their wrongs, and turn their
    sorrow into joy. Pour the spirit of light and knowledge, grace and
    wisdom, into the hearts of her Prophets, and clothe her Priests
    with salvation. Let light and knowledge march forth through the
    empire of darkness, and may the honest in heart flow to their
    standard, and join in the march to go forth to meet the Bridegroom."

    Let a peculiar blessing rest upon the Presidency of Thy Church, for
    at them are the arrows of the enemy directed. Be Thou to them a sun
    and a shield, their strong tower and hiding place; and in the time
    of distress or danger be Thou near to deliver. Also the quorum of
    the Twelve, do Thou be pleased to stand by them for Thou knowest
    the {459} obstacles which they have to encounter, the temptations
    to which they are exposed, and the privations which they must
    suffer. Give us, [the Twelve] therefore, strength according to our
    day, and help us to bear a faithful testimony of Jesus and His
    Gospel, to finish with fidelity and honor the work which Thou hast
    given us to do, and then give us a place in Thy glorious kingdom.
    And let this blessing rest upon every faithful officer and member
    in Thy Church. And all the glory and honor will we ascribe unto God
    and the Lamb forever and ever. Amen.

    On the top of Mount Olives I erected a pile of stones as a witness
    according to ancient custom. On what was anciently called Mount
    Zion, [Moriah?] where the Temple stood, I erected another, and used
    the rod according to the prediction upon my head.

    I have found many Jews who listened with intense interest. The idea
    of the Jews being restored to Palestine is gaining ground in Europe
    almost every day. Jerusalem is strongly fortified with many cannon
    upon its walls. The wall is ten feet thick on the sides that would
    be most exposed, and four or five feet where the descent from the
    wall is almost perpendicular. The number of inhabitants within the
    walls is about twenty thousand. About seven thousand of this number
    are Jews, the balance being mostly Turks and Armenians. Many of the
    Jews who are old go to this place to die, and many are coming from
    Europe into this eastern world. The great wheel is unquestionably
    in motion, and the word of the Almighty has declared that it shall
    roll.

    I have not time to write particulars now, but suffice it to say
    that my mission has been quite as prosperous as I could expect.

    I am now about to go on board a fine ship for Trieste, and from
    thence I intend to proceed to Regensburg and there publish our
    faith in the German language. There are those who are ready and
    willing to assist me.

    I send you this letter by Captain Withers, an English gentleman,
    who goes direct to England, on board the Oriental steamer. He has
    come with me from Jerusalem. If I had money sufficient I should be
    almost tempted to take passage on board of her to England, but this
    I cannot do.

    On receipt of this, I wish you to write to me immediately, and
    direct to Regensburg, on the Danube, Bayern, or Bavaria. If you
    know anything of my family tell me.

    My best respects to yourself and your family, to Brothers Adams and
    Snow, and to all the Saints in England.

    May grace, mercy and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord
    Jesus Christ, rest upon you all from this time, henceforth and for
    ever. Amen.

    Your brother in Christ,

    Orson Hyde.

Footnotes:

1. The circumstances of removing the nuisance here referred to, for
which damages were demanded, is related in an editorial note in the
_Times and Seasons_ as follows: The "Mr. Kilbourn," referred to in the
editorial, was very bitter anti-Mormon, and became one of the Prophet's
most deadly enemies.

THE NUISANCE

"It is known to many of our patrons, that a certain young man very
injudiciously, and contrary to the remonstrances of his friends, and
in violation of the ordinances of this city, not long since erected
a small building, near the Temple square avowedly for the purpose
of transacting the business of the grocer. Said building was for a
short time occupied for that purpose; but so heavy did the from of
public disapprobation rest upon it, that it was finally vacated, and
stood some time, a lonely wreck of folly. In the meantime, the very
sanctimonious and extremely unfortunate Mr. Kilbourn of Montrose, threw
out to the public, ungentlemanly and slanderous imputations concerning
the matter, saying that the Presidency of the Church abetted and
approbated the concern, etc., and the building having become a monument
for every fool to write upon and exhibit his folly, to the annoyance of
the citizens, the city council very judiciously ordered the building
removed as a nuisance. Some opposition to the execution of this order
was exhibited, and the authorities called out a few of the military and
demolished the building. The city authorities manifest a determination
to carry out strictly the temperance ordinances of the city, and in
this we wish them 'God speed.' We suppose, however, that Kilbourn and
his junto will bray worse than ever, and 'Mormonism' be adjudged by
'witch law.' 'Take the accused, bind him head and foot, and cast him
into the pool; if he sinks and drowns he is innocent, if he floats take
him out and hang him or burn in with fire.' We say, let the poor fools
judge till they themselves are overtaken by judgment, and let they bray
till they burst their wind chests." (_Times and Seasons_, Vol. III, pp.
559-560).

2. "Whoso receiveth you receiveth me, and the same will clothe you
and give you money. And he who feeds you, or clothes you or gives you
money, shall in no wise lose his reward: and he who doeth not these
things is not my disciple; by this you may know my disciples." (Doc. &
Cov., sec. lxxxiv.)

{460}



CHAPTER XXVII.

Official Denunciation of Thieves at Nauvoo--The Moral Law of the
Church--Abandonment of Ramus as a Stake of Zion--Baptism for the Dead,
an Epistle.

_Wednesday, 24_.--Elder Joseph Fielding, who sailed from Liverpool, on
the _Tyrean_, with 204 Saints, arrived at Warsaw with his company; and
Elders Willard Richards and John Taylor went to meet them and to give
such counsel as their situation required.

_Friday, 26_.

    _Affidavit of Hyrum Smith--Denouncing Theft_.

    Whereas it hath been intimated to me by persons of credibility
    that there are persons in the surrounding country, who profess to
    be members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,
    who have been using their influence and endeavors to instil into
    the minds of good and worthy citizens in the state of Illinois,
    and the adjoining states, that the First Presidency, and others
    in authority and high standing in said Church, do sanction and
    approbate the members of said Church in stealing property from
    those persons who do not belong to said Church, and thereby to
    induce persons to aid and abet them in the act of stealing, and
    other evil practices; I therefore, hereby disavow any sanction
    or approbation by me, of the crime of theft, or any other evil
    practice, in any person or persons whatever, whereby either the
    lives or property of our fellow men may be unlawfully taken or
    molested; neither are such things sanctioned or approbated by
    the First Presidency, or any other person in authority or good
    standing in said Church, but such acts are altogether in violation
    of the rules, order, and regulations of the Church, contrary to
    the teachings given in said Church, and the laws of both God and
    man. I caution the unwary, who belong to the aforesaid Church,
    and all other persons, against being duped or led into any act or
    scheme which may endanger their character, lives, or property, or
    bring reproach upon the Church; and I certify that I hold my person
    {461} and property ready to support the laws of the land, in the
    detection of any person or persons who may commit any breach of the
    same. To which I subscribe my name, and testify, this 26th day of
    November, 1841.

    Hyrum Smith.

    Sworn to and subscribed before me this 26th day of November, 1841.

    Ebenezer Robinson, J. P.

I attended city council and presented a bill for "an ordinance in
relation to Hawkers, Pedlars, Public Shows, and Exhibitions, in order
to prevent any immoral or obscene exhibition," which passed the council
by unanimous vote.

[Sidenote: The Prophet's Estimate of the Book of Mormon.]

_Sunday, 28_.--I spent the day in the council with the Twelve Apostles
at the house of President Young, conversing with them upon a variety
of subjects. Brother Joseph Fielding was present, having been absent
four years on a mission to England. I told the brethren that the Book
of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone
of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its
precepts, than by any other book.

_Monday, 29_.--I gave the following affidavit, and published it in the
_Times and Seasons_.

    _The Prophet's Denunciation of Thieves_.

    City Of Nauvoo, Illinois, November 29, A. D. 1841.

    To The Public.

    The occurrence of recent events makes it criminal for me to remain
    longer silent. The tongue of the vile yet speaks, and sends forth
    the poison of asps, the ears of the spoiler yet hear, and he
    puts forth his hands to iniquity. It has been proclaimed upon
    the house top and in the secret chamber, in the public walks and
    private circle, throughout the length and breadth of this vast
    continent, that stealing by the Latter-day Saints has received
    my approval; nay, that I have taught the doctrine, encouraged
    them in plunder, and led on the van--than which nothing is more
    foreign from my heart. I disfellowship the perpetrators of all such
    abominations--they are devils and not Saints, totally unfit for the
    society of Christians or men. It is true that some {462} professing
    to be Latter-day Saints have taught such vile heresies, but all
    are not Israel that are of Israel; and I wish it to be distinctly
    understood in all coming time, that the Church, over which I have
    the honor of presiding, will ever set its brows like brass, and
    its face like steel, against all such abominable acts of villainy
    and crime; and to this end I append my affidavit of disavowal,
    taken this day before General Bennet, that there may be no mistake
    hereafter as to my real sentiments, or those of the leaders of the
    Church, in relation to this important matter.

    State Of Illinois, Hancock County.

    Before me, John C. Bennett, Mayor of the City of Nauvoo, personally
    came Joseph Smith, President of the Church of Jesus Christ of
    Latter-day Saints (commonly called the Mormon Church), who being
    duly sworn according to law, deposeth and saith, that he has never
    directly or indirectly encouraged the purloining of property,
    or taught the doctrine of stealing, or any other evil practice,
    and that all such vile and unlawful acts will ever receive his
    unreserved and unqualified disapproval, and the most vigorous
    opposition of the Church over which he presides; and further this
    deponent saith not.

    Joseph Smith,

    President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

    Sworn to and subscribed before me, at my office, in the city of
    Nauvoo, this 29th day of November, A. D. 1841.

    John C. Bennett,

    L. S. Mayor of the City of Nauvoo.

    Now it is to be hoped that none will hereafter be so reckless
    as to state that I, or the Church to which I belong, approve of
    thieving--but that all the friends of law and order will join in
    ferreting out thieves wherever and whenever they may be found,
    and assist in bringing them to that condign punishment which such
    infamous crimes so richly merit.

    Joseph Smith,

    President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

[Sidenote: Conference in New York.]

A conference was held in New York City, Elder John E. Page presiding;
in which were represented New York City, 17 Elders, 2 Priests, 1
Teacher, 2 Deacons, 179 members. Five branches were {463} represented,
including 5 Elders, 6 Priests, 3 Teachers, 3 Deacons, 149 members. 3
Elders, 2 Priests, 1 Teacher, were ordained. There were present at
the conference, 1 Apostle, 6 High Priests, 16 Elders, 3 Priests, 2
Teachers, 2 Deacons.

_Tuesday, 30_.--Attended a council of the Twelve Apostles at President
Brigham Young's home. President Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball,
Willard Richards, Orson Pratt, Lyman Wight, John Taylor, and Wilford
Woodruff were present.

It was voted that Ebenezer Robinson be solicited to give up the
department of printing the _Times and Seasons_ to Elder Willard
Richards.

Voted, that if Brother Robinson does not comply with this solicitation,
Elder Richards be instructed to procure a press and type, and publish a
paper for the Church.

Moved by Elder Young, and seconded by Elder Woodruff, that Lyman Wight
and John Taylor present these resolutions to Brother Robinson.

_Wednesday, December 1_.--In view of the proceedings of the meeting of
the Church at Ramus, on the 18th November, when certain individuals
were cut off from the Church for stealing, the Twelve issued the
following epistle:

    _Warning of the Twelve Apostles Against Thieves_.

    We are glad that the perpetrators of the above crime have been
    caught in their iniquitous practices; and we are only sorry that
    anybody should be found who would bail them out of prison, for such
    individuals, if the charges are true, ought to be made an example
    of, and not be suffered to run at large.

    We have been informed that some of them have been talking of
    moving into this place, but we would here inform them that persons
    whose conduct has exposed them to the just censure of an indignant
    public, can have no fellowship amongst us, as we cannot, and will
    not countenance rogues, thieves, and scoundrels knowingly; and,
    we hereby warn them that the law will be as rigorously enforced
    against them in {464} this place as in any other, as we consider
    such characters a curse to society, whose pestilential breath
    withers the morals, and blasts the fame and reputation of any
    people among whom they may sojourn. There is no person that is,
    and ought to be despised more than the thief, by any respectable
    community; yet more especially ought such persons to be abhorred
    who have taken upon them the name of Christ, and thus with the
    pretext of religion, and garb of sanctity, cloak their nefarious
    practices.

    We have been told that some individual or individuals have, under
    false pretenses, been wishing to palm their wicked and devilish
    principles upon the authorities of the Church, stating that it was
    part and parcel of the Gospel which God had revealed, and that it
    is one of the mysteries which the initiated only are acquainted
    with. We know not how to express our abhorrence at such an idea,
    and can only say that it is engendered in hell, founded in
    falsehood, and is the offspring of the devil; and it is at variance
    with every principle of righteousness and truth, and will damn all
    that are connected with it, for all mysteries are only such to the
    ignorant, and vanish as soon as men have sufficient intelligence
    to comprehend them; and there are no mysteries connected with
    godliness and our holy religion, but what are pure, innocent,
    virtuous, just, and righteous. If this [the foregoing practice of
    thieving] is a mystery, it is the "mystery of iniquity." We are
    at a loss to know who could be vile enough to propagate such base
    and unfounded statements, and we would say to the Church, beware
    of such men! Set them down as the worst of scoundrels, and reject
    their foul insinuations with the indignation and disgust that such
    unhallowed and vile insinuations deserve; for such men are either
    avowed apostates, or on the eve of apostasy, or have only taken
    the name of religion to cloak their hypocrisy; we fear the latter,
    in some instances is the case, and that Mississippi scoundrels [1]
    palm themselves upon us to cover their guilt. We {465} further
    call upon the Church to bring all such characters before the
    authorities, that they may be tried, and dealt with according to
    the law of God, and delivered up unto the laws of the land.

    It is scarcely possible that any virtuous man could be made to
    believe any such statements, however ignorant; yet lest through
    false pretenses the innocent might be drawn into a snare, we would
    quote the following from the Book of Doctrine and Covenants,
    section 42, paragraph 84, 85, "And if any man or woman shall rob,
    he or she shall be delivered up unto the law of the land. And if
    he or she shall steal, he or she shall be delivered up unto the
    law of the land." Again, section 42, paragraph 20, [2] "Thou shalt
    not steal, and he that stealeth and will not repent shall be cast
    out." The broad law of God is, "Thou shalt not steal," and thieves,
    together with "liars and whoremongers," will eventually be found
    without the city, with dogs and sorcerers. We need only say that
    if we find such characters engaged in their nefarious practices,
    whether in or out of the Church, we shall take them up, and deal
    with them according to the law of God and man; and we wish the
    Church to inform us of such delinquents, or the sin will lie at
    their own door.

    As there are gangs of robbers up and down this river, from whom
    we have suffered much, having had many horses, cattle and other
    property stolen, we purpose instituting a police for the protection
    of our property, and the rigorous enforcement of the laws of our
    country; and should any, who call themselves Latter-day Saints, be
    found in their midst, they will be cut off from the Church, and
    handed over to the law of the land.

    We hope that what we have written may suffice, and take
    this opportunity of expressing our decided and unqualified
    disapprobation of anything like theft in all its bearings, as being
    calculated to destroy the peace of society, to injure the Church
    of Jesus Christ, to wound the character of the people of God, and
    to stamp with eternal infamy all {466} who follow such diabolical
    practices; to blast their character on earth, and to consign them
    to eternal perdition.

    Brigham Young,

    Heber C. Kimball,

    Parley P. Pratt,

    Orson Hyde,

    William Smith,

    Orson Pratt,

    John E. Page,

    Willard Richards,

    Lyman Wight,

    Wilford Woodruff,

    John Taylor,

    George A. Smith.

    Nauvoo, Illinois, December 1, 1841. [3]

{467} _Thursday, 2_.--I received the following revelation to Nancy
Marinda Hyde--

    _Revelation_.

    Verily thus saith the Lord unto you my servant Joseph, that
    inasmuch as you have called upon me to know my will concerning my
    handmaid Nancy Marinda Hyde--behold it is my will that she should
    have a better place prepared for her, than that in which she now
    lives, in order that her life may be spared unto her; therefore
    go and say unto my servant, Ebenezer Robinson, and to my handmaid
    his wife--Let them open their doors and take her and her children
    into their house and take care of them faithfully and kindly until
    my servant Orson Hyde returns from his mission, or until some
    other provision can be made for her welfare and safety. Let them
    do these things and spare not, and I the Lord will bless them and
    heal them if they do it not grudgingly, saith the Lord God; and she
    shall be a blessing unto them; and let my handmaid Nancy Marinda
    Hyde hearken to the counsel of my servant Joseph in all things
    whatsoever he shall teach unto her, and it shall be a blessing upon
    her and upon her children after her, unto her justification, saith
    the Lord.

_Saturday, 4_.--I attended the city council, and spoke in defense of
the marshal, in his not serving a warrant, when his life would have
been endangered.

[Sidenote: Conference at Ramus.]

A conference was held at Ramus on the 4th and 5th of December, 1841,
over which the Patriarch of the Church, Hyrum Smith, presided; Joseph
Johnson acted as clerk; Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard
Richards and John Taylor, of the {468} quorum of the Twelve Apostles
were present. It was unanimously resolved by the conference that the
organization of the Church at Ramus as a Stake be discontinued and that
John Lawson be presiding Elder over the branch at Ramus, and Joseph
Johnson, clerk; and that William Wightman, the Bishop, transfer all the
Church property in Ramus to the sole Trustee in Trust, Joseph Smith,
President of the whole Church.

[Sidenote: Prophet Proof Reads Book of Mormon.]

_Sunday, 5_.--I commenced to proof read the Book of Mormon, previous to
its being stereotyped; read sixty pages.

In the evening Brother Wilford Woodruff and wife visited me. We
conversed about the Missouri troubles, and the death of David W.
Patten; also his last request. [4]

_Tuesday, 7_.--The following is a copy of a letter to Lawyers Bushnell
and Browning of Quincy:

    _Letter of the Prophet to Esquires Browning and Bushnell--Payment
    of Notes_.

    _Esquires Browning and Bushnell_:

    Gentlemen:--Your letter of the 23rd ultimo, concerning two notes
    placed in your hands by Messrs. Halsted, Haines and Co., against
    myself and thirty-one others, for collection, was duly received.
    In reply, I must inform you, that I am not in possession of means,
    belonging to me individually to liquidate those notes at present;
    the reason is apparent to every one; I need not relate to you
    the persecution I have suffered, and the loss and confiscation
    of all my effects at various times as a reason of my inability;
    you know it all, and so do the gentlemen whose notes you hold for
    collection. But I wish you to say to them that if they will give
    me my time (and no more than I must necessarily have), they shall
    have their pay in some way or other. I have the means at command
    in the East, which, with a sufficient indulgence, will enable me
    to pay them every whit, but unless this is granted me, it will be
    impossible for me to do so. All I ask of those gentlemen and this
    generation is that they should not tie up my hands, nor thwart me
    in my operations. If this is granted me, I pledge my word, yea,
    my sacred honor, that all that can in fairness be demanded at my
    hands, either now or at any time shall ultimately be adjusted to
    the satisfaction of all concerned. This is all that I can say at
    this time, or do, {469} hoping that you will communicate to Messrs.
    Holsted, Haines and Co. the contents, or at all events the purport
    of this letter, together with my sincere regard for their welfare,
    and as regards you, gentlemen,

    I remain very respectfully,

    Your obedient servant,

    Joseph Smith.

_Wednesday, 8_.--The Twelve who attended the Ramus conference on the
4th instant returned with nearly a thousand dollars worth of property,
consisting of horses, wagons, provisions, clothing, etc., for the
Temple, which had been donated by the Saints at Ramus.

_Friday 10_.--I wrote to Horace R. Hotchkiss, Esq.

    _The Prophet's Letter to Mr. Hotchkiss--Commerce Lands_.

    Dear Sir:--Your letters, dated October, 11th and November 9th,
    1841, have both been received, and that of the 9th of November is
    now before me. I am glad that you are pleased with the proceedings
    of our last conference relative to "Mr. Hotchkiss purchase,"
    concerning which there had been some unpleasant feeling which had
    originated partly from a misunderstanding between us, and partly
    through the inefficiency, neglect or sickness of Dr. Galland. I
    wrote a letter to your friend and partner, Esquire Tuttle, some
    time since, which no doubt you have seen before now, and with which
    I hope you are also satisfied. I have handed your request to the
    editor of the _Times and Seasons_, who will forward you the desired
    papers. I am glad that James Ivins settled with you the $2,500
    note, but sorry that you suffered yourself to lose in the sale of
    the land you had of him. As regards the Cook's Mill Tavern stand,
    and the one hundred and thirty-seven acres of pine land, which you
    propose to allow the Church three thousand dollars for, I have to
    say in reply, that I have consulted, not only my own feelings as
    sole Trustee in Trust for the Church; but also the feelings of
    those of the Church whose opinions I can always rely upon in such
    matters, and the conclusion is that thirty-two hundred dollars is
    the least the property ought to be sold for. You can, therefore,
    have it for three thousand two hundred, which is considerably less
    than it cost the Church; we are willing to make a partial sacrifice
    in the property, but under the circumstances, think that you can
    afford to give us two hundred dollars more than you proposed. The
    health of our place is at this time pretty good, and we hope it may
    continue to improve, with the improvements of the city.

    I remain very respectfully yours, &c.,

    Joseph Smith.

{470} _Saturday, 11_.--Late this evening, while sitting in council with
the Twelve in my new store on Water street, I directed Brigham Young,
President of the Twelve Apostles, to go immediately and instruct the
building committee in their duty, and forbid them receiving any more
property for the building of the Temple, until they received it from
the Trustee in Trust, and if the committee did not give heed to the
instruction, and attend to their duty, to put them in the way so to do.

Elder Willard Richards has left Warsaw for Nauvoo, it being considered
unnecessary for him to tarry there any longer.

[Sidenote: The Prophet's Difficulties in Writing the Annals of the
Church.]

Since I have been engaged in laying the foundation of the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, I have been prevented in various
ways from continuing my journal and history in a manner satisfactory
to myself or in justice to the cause. Long imprisonments, vexatious
and long-continued law-suits, the treachery of some of my clerks, the
death of others, and the poverty of myself and brethren from continued
plunder and driving, have prevented my handing down to posterity a
connected memorandum of events desirable to all lovers of truth; yet I
have continued to keep up a journal in the best manner my circumstances
would allow, and dictate for my history from time to time, as I have
had opportunity so that the labors and suffering of the first Elders
and Saints of this last kingdom might not wholly be lost to the world.

_Sunday, 12_.--I preached in the morning at Snyder's Hotel.

In the evening, the Twelve met in council at Brother Heber C. Kimball's.

_Monday, 13_.--I appointed Willard Richards recorder for the Temple,
and my private Secretary and general Clerk, and he commenced his labors
in my new office in the brick store.

[Sidenote: Anti Mormonism at Warsaw.]

Some time in the fall of 1839, Daniel S. Witter, of the {471} steam
mill at Warsaw, solicited the First Presidency of the Church to make
a settlement on the school section No. 16, one mile south of Warsaw,
and the solicitations were continued by Daniel S. Witter, Mark Aldrich
and others, from time to time, till the spring or summer of 1841, when
articles of agreement were entered into between Calvin A. Warren, Esq.,
Witter, Aldrich and others, owners of the school section and the First
Presidency, giving the Saints the privilege of settling on the school
section, which had been surveyed and laid out in town lots, and called
_Warren_, on certain conditions, and Willard Richards went to Warsaw
on the 8th of September, and spent several weeks to prepare for the
reception of immigrants. In the meantime the inhabitants of Warsaw
attempted to form an anti-Mormon society, and were much enraged because
Esquire Davis (who had spoken favorably of the Saints) was appointed
clerk of the county by Judge Stephen A. Douglas.

In November two hundred and four Saints arrived at Warsaw, from
England, led by Joseph Fielding, and were visited on the 24th of
November by Elders Willard Richards, and John Taylor of the Twelve, and
counseled to tarry at Warsaw according to the instruction of the First
Presidency.

[Sidenote: Further Trouble at Warsaw.]

_December 13_.--Isaac Decker, presiding Elder at Warsaw, stated to the
Presidency of Nauvoo, that Mr. Witter had raised one dollar per barrel
on flour, and sold the sweepings of his mill to the Saints at $2.25 per
hundred; and that Witter and Aldrich had forbidden the brethren the
privilege of getting the old wood on the school section, which they had
full liberty to get; that the price of wood on the wharf had fallen
twenty-five cents per cord since the arrival of the Saints; that the
citizens had raised their rent, &c.; and the First Presidency decided
that the Saints should remove from {472} Warsaw to Nauvoo immediately;
and that the proceedings at Warsaw be published in the _Times and
Seasons_.

This morning President Young delivered the message I gave him on
Saturday evening to Reynolds Cahoon and Elias Higbee, the Temple
Committee, in presence of Elders Kimball, Woodruff, and Richards.

Elder Richards by letter instructed the Saints at Warsaw to remove to
Nauvoo.

    Baptism For The Dead.

    _An Epistle of the Twelve Apostles to the Saints of the Last Days_.

    The building of the Temple of the Lord in the city of Nauvoo, is
    occupying the first place in the exertions and prayers of many of
    the Saints at the present time, knowing, as they do, that if this
    building is not completed speedily, "we shall be rejected as a
    Church with our dead;" for the Lord our God hath spoken it.

    But while many are thus engaged in laboring and watching and
    praying for this all important object, there are many, very
    many more, who do not thus come up to their privilege and their
    duty in this thing, and in many instances we are confident that
    their neglect arises from a want of proper understanding of the
    principles upon which this building is founded, and by which it
    must be completed.

    The children of Israel were commanded to build a house in the
    land of promise; and so are the Saints of the last days, as you
    will see in the Revelation given to Joseph the Seer, January 19,
    1841, wherein those ordinances may be revealed which have been hid
    for ages, even their anointings and washings, and baptisms for
    the dead; wherein they may meet in solemn assemblies for their
    memorials, sacrifices, and oracles in their most holy places; and
    wherein they may receive conversations and statutes, and judgments,
    for the beginning of the revelations and foundations of Zion, and
    the glory and honor and adornment of all her municipals through the
    medium which God has ordained.

    In the same revelation the command is to "all the Saints from afar"
    as well as those already gathered to this place: to arise with one
    consent and build the Temple; to prepare a place where the Most
    High may manifest Himself to His people. No one is excepted who
    hath aught in his possession, for what have ye that ye have not
    received? And I will require mine own with usury, saith the Lord;
    so that those {473} who live thousands of miles from this place,
    come under the same law, and are entitled to the same blessings and
    privileges as those who have already gathered. But some may say,
    how can this be, I am not there, therefore I cannot meet in the
    Temple, cannot be baptized in the font? The command of heaven is
    to you, to all, gather; and when you arrive here, if it is found
    that you have previously sent of your gold, or your silver, or
    your substance, the tithing and consecrations which are required
    of you for this building, you will find your names, tithings and
    consecrations written in the Book of the Law of the Lord, to be
    kept in the Temple, as a witness in your favor, showing that you
    are a proprietor in that building, and are entitled to your share
    of the privileges thereunto belonging.

    One of those privileges which is particularly attracting the notice
    of the Saints at the present moment, is baptism for the dead, in
    the font which is so far completed as to be dedicated, and several
    have already attended to this ordinance by which the sick have
    been made whole, and the prisoner set free; but while we have been
    called to administer this ordinance, we have been led to inquire
    into the propriety of baptizing those who have not been obedient,
    and assisted to build the place for baptism; and it seems to us
    unreasonable to expect that the Great Jehovah will approbate
    such administration; for if the Church must be brought under
    condemnation, and rejected with her dead, if she fail to build the
    house and its appurtenances, why should not individuals of the
    Church, who thus neglect, come under the same condemnation? For
    if they are to be rejected, they may as well be rejected without
    baptism as with it; for their baptism can be of no avail before
    God, and the time to baptize them may be appropriated to building
    the walls of the house, and this is according to the understanding
    which we have received from him who is our spokesman.

    Let it not be supposed that the sick and the destitute are to be
    denied the blessings of the Lord's house; God forbid; His eye is
    ever over them for good. He that hath not, and cannot obtain, but
    saith in his heart, if I had, I would give freely, is accepted
    as freely as he that gives of his abundance. The Temple is to be
    built by tithing and consecration, and every one is at liberty to
    consecrate all they find in their hearts so to do; but the tithings
    required, is one-tenth of all anyone possessed at the commencement
    of the building, and one-tenth part of all his increase from that
    time until the completion of the same, whether it be money, or
    whatever he may be blessed with.

    Many in this place are laboring every tenth day for the house,
    and this is the tithing of their income, for they have nothing
    else; others would labor the same, but they are sick, therefore
    excusable; when they get well, let them begin; while there are
    others who appear to {474} think their own business of more
    importance than the Lord's. Of such we would ask, who gave you your
    time, health, strength, and put you into business? And will you not
    begin quickly to return with usury that which you have received?
    Our God will not wait always.

    We would remind some two or three hundred Elders, who offered to go
    on missions, some six months, others one year, and some two years,
    and had their missions assigned them at the general conference to
    labor on the Temple, that most of their names are still with us,
    and we wish them to call and take their names away, and give them
    up to the building committee.

    Brethren, you have as great an interest at stake in this thing as
    we have, but as our Master, even the Master-builder of the Temple,
    whose throne is on high, has seen fit to constitute us stewards in
    some parts of His household; we feel it important for us to see
    to it that our Master is not defrauded, and especially by those
    who have pledged their word, their time, their talents, to His
    services; and we hope this gentle hint will suffice, that we may
    not be compelled to publish the names of those referred to.

    Probably some may think they could have gone on a mission, but
    cannot labor, as they have no means of boarding themselves, but
    let such remember that several score of brethren and sisters in
    this city, offered at the general conference, to board one or more
    laborers on the Temple till the same should be completed, and but
    few of those as yet have had the opportunity of boarding any one.
    To all such we would say, you are not forgotten, we have your names
    also, and we expect soon to send someone to your table, therefore
    put your houses in order and never be ready to refuse the first
    offer of a guest.

    Large stores of provisions will be required to complete the work,
    and now is the time for securing it, while meat is plenty and can
    be had for one half the value that it can at other seasons of the
    year, and the weather is cool and suitable for packing. Let the
    brethren for two hundred miles around drive their fat cattle and
    hogs to this place, where they may be preserved, and there will be
    a supply till another favorable season rolls around, or till the
    end of the labor.

    Now is the time to secure food, now is the time that the trustee
    is ready to receive your droves. Not the maimed, the lean, the
    halt, and the blind, and such that you cannot use; it is for the
    Lord, and He wants no such offering; but if you want His blessing,
    give Him the best, give Him as good as He has given you. Beds and
    bedding, socks, mittens, shoes, clothing of every description,
    and store goods are needed for the comfort of the laborers this
    winter; journeymen, stone cutters, quarrymen, teams and teamsters
    for drawing stone and all kinds of provision for men and beast, are
    needed in abundance.

    {475} There are individuals who have given nothing as yet, either
    as tithing or consecration, thinking that they shall be able to do
    a great deal some time hence if they continue their present income
    to their own use, but this is a mistaken idea. Suppose that all
    should act upon this principle, no one would do ought at present,
    consequently the building must cease, and this generation remain
    without a house, and the Church be rejected; then suppose the next
    generation labor upon the same principle, and the same in all
    succeeding generations, the Son of God would never have a place on
    the earth to lay His head.

    Let every individual remember that their tithings and consecrations
    are required from what they have, and not what they expect to
    have some time hence, and are wanted for immediate use. All money
    and other property designed for tithing and consecrations to the
    building of the Temple must hereafter be presented to the Trustee
    in Trust, President Joseph Smith, and entered at the recorder's
    office, in the book before referred to; and all receipts now holden
    by individuals, which they have received of the building committee
    for property delivered to them, must also be forwarded to the
    recorder's office for entry, to secure the appropriation of said
    property according to the original design.

    The Elders everywhere will instruct the brethren both in public
    and in private, in the principles and doctrines set forth in this
    Epistle, so that every individual in the Church may have a perfect
    understanding of his duty and privileges.

    Brigham Young,

    Heber C. Kimball,

    Orson Pratt,

    William Smith,

    Lyman Wight,

    Wilford Woodruff,

    John Taylor,

    Geo. A. Smith,

    Willard Richards.

    Nauvoo, Illinois, December 13, 1841.

Footnotes:

1. This has reference to the blacklegs that infested the upper
Mississippi region, and who plied their trade in disposing of
counterfeit money and stolen goods along the river. The character of
the old inhabitants in Northern Illinois at this time, (1840-44),
Governor Ford describes in his "_History of Illinois_" as follows:
"Then, again, the northern part of the State was not destitute
of its organized bands of rogues, engaged in murders, robberies,
horse-stealing, and in making and passing counterfeit money. These
rogues were scattered all over the north; but the most of them were
located in the counties of Ogle, Winnebago, Lee, and DeKalb. In the
county of Ogle, they were so numerous, strong, and well-organized, that
they could not be convicted for their crimes. By getting some of their
numbers on the juries, by producing hosts of witnesses to sustain their
defense by perjured evidence, and by changing the venue from one county
to another, and by continuances from term to term, and by the inability
of witnesses to attend from time to time at a distant and foreign
county, they most generally managed to be acquitted."

2. The above references are published to correspond in current editions
of the Doctrine and Covenants. The revelation quoted was given as a law
to the Church, February 9, 1831. It was given in the presence of twelve
Elders, at Kirtland, in fulfillment of the promise that the Lord made
to the church while yet located in New York, in a revelation commanding
them to move from the eastern countries to the Ohio; "And there," said
the Lord, "I will give unto you my law, and there you shall be endowed
with power from on high." (Doctrine and Covenants, section 38: 32.) As
introductory to the revelation the Prophet said under date of February
9: "According to the promise heretofore made, the Lord gave the
following revelation embracing the Law of the Church;" and indeed, it
is appropriately so called, for it embraces well nigh every moral law
of the Gospel, and is a most valuable chapter of divine instructions to
the Church.

3. About this time there were gangs of robbers operating up and down
the Mississippi River, from which the Saints suffered, as many of their
horses and cattle were stolen, but more serious injury arose from the
fact that the acts of these robbers were attributed to the Saints
themselves, and did much to prejudice the minds of the public against
them. Governor Ford in his "History of Illinois," from 1814 to 1847 in
referring to these charges against the Saints, and speaking of events
taking place about this time in Nauvoo, said: "It was a fact also,
that some larcenies and robberies had been committed, and that Mormons
had been convicted of the crimes, and that other larcenies had been
committed by persons unknown, but suspected to be Mormons. Justice,
however, requires me here to say, that upon such investigation as I
then could make, the charge of promiscuous stealing appeared to be
exaggerated." (History of Illinois, Ford, p. 329.)

The practice of charging these robberies upon members of the Church
continued through the next three or four years. Speaking of the time
somewhat later than the period with which our annals above deal, the
Governor said: "On my late visit to Hancock county, I was informed
by some of their violent enemies, that the larcenies of the Mormons
had become unusually numerous and insufferable. They indeed admitted
that but little had been done in this way in their immediate vicinity.
But they insisted that sixteen horses had been stolen by the Mormons
in one night, near Lima in the county of Adams. At the close of the
expedition, I called at this same town of Lima, and upon inquiry was
told that no horses had been stolen in that neighborhood, but that
sixteen horses had been stolen in one night in Hancock county. This
last informant being told of the Hancock story, again changed the venue
to another distant settlement in the northern edge of Adams." (History
of Illinois, p. 331.)

And thus sensational reports of "Mormon stealings" were made the
shuttle-cock between the battle-doors of various neighborhoods.

In addition to the very emphatic utterances of the Prophet Joseph, his
brother Hyrum, and the Twelve, the _Times and Seasons_ editorially said:

"THIEVES.

"We are highly pleased to see the very energetic measures taken by
our citizens to suppress thieving. It has been a source of grief unto
us that there were any in our midst who would wilfully take property
from any person which did not belong to them, knowing that if any
person, who does, or ever did belong to this Church, should steal,
the whole Church would have to bear the stigma, and the sound goes
abroad that the Mormons are a set of thieves and robbers, a charge
which we unequivocally deny, and pronounce a falsehood of the basest
kind. That there are some amongst us base enough to commit such acts
we do not pretend to deny, but whether they are all members of this
Church or not, we do not know; but some who are have been caught in
their iniquity, and one was among the missing after a warrant was
out for him; circumstantial proof is so strong against him, that his
guilt is established without a doubt. We have heard that some of those
characters have said that such things are sanctioned by the authorities
of the Church, this is the most base of all lies: and we would here
warn all well disposed persons, to be aware of such characters, and if
any such thing is ever intimated to them, to heed it not, unless it be
to report such persons to the proper authorities so that they can be
brought to condign punishment; for know assuredly that if you listen to
them, they will prove an adder in your path, and eventually lead you
down to destruction."--_Times and Seasons_, p. 615.

4. See Vol. III., p. 171.

{476}



CHAPTER XXVIII.

Kirtland _vs_. Nauvoo--Political Attitude of the People of Nauvoo
Declared--Publications Mormon and Anti-Mormon for 1841--Close of the
Year.

_Tuesday, December 14, 1841_.--I commenced opening, unpacking, and
assorting a lot of dry goods in the second story of my new store,
situate on the northwest corner of block 155. [1] The joiners and
masons are yet at work in the lower part of the building.

_Wednesday, 15_.--In reply to inquiries concerning Almon W. Babbitt,
and the printing press at Kirtland, contained in a letter written at
Kirtland, November 16, 1841, by Lester Brooks and Zebedee Coltrin,
acting presidents, and Thomas Burdick, Bishop and council, to President
Joseph Smith and Brigham Young, it was decided as follows:

    _Decision in the Case of Almon W. Babbitt and Kirtland_.

    It remains for Almon W. Babbitt to offer satisfaction, if he
    wishes so to do, according to the minutes of the conference. You
    are doubtless all well aware that all the stakes, except those in
    Hancock county, Illinois, and Lee county, Iowa, were discontinued
    some time since by the First Presidency, as published in the _Times
    and Seasons_; but as it appears that there are many in Kirtland
    who desire to remain there, and build up that place, and as you
    have made great exertions according to your letter, to establish a
    printing press, and take care of the poor, &c., since that period,
    you may as well continue operations according to your designs, and
    go on with your printing, and do what you can in righteousness to
    build up Kirtland, but do not suffer yourselves to harbor the idea
    that Kirtland will rise on the ruins of Nauvoo. It is the privilege
    of brethren emigrating from any quarter to come to this place, and
    it is not right to attempt to persuade those who desire it, to stop
    short.

The foregoing is an extract from my letter in reply.

{477} The Twelve Apostles were in council at Elder Kimball's.

[Sidenote: Affairs at Ramus.]

_Tuesday, 16_.--William Wightman of Ramus, delivered to President
Joseph Smith, sole trustee-in-trust, the deed to the unsold and bonded
lots of land in the town of Ramus, bearing date December 8, 1841; also
the plat of the "first addition to Ramus," and the notes which have
been received of individuals who have purchased lots, and the bonds
of William Miller, September 21, 1840, and of Ute Perkins, November
26, 1840, and of William J. Perkins, November 7, 1840, and of John
F. Charles, November 16, 1841, for lots of land adjoining Ramus, and
which may hereafter be added to the town plats (a part of the land
included in William Miller's bond is included in the first addition to
Ramus, and the notes were transferred to the sole trustee-in-trust, for
the benefit of the whole Church, by a vote of the Ramus conference,
December 4 and 5, 1841), after applying sufficient of said property to
liquidate the claims of those from whom the town was purchased, and
also paying two notes given by William Wightman for money borrowed to
pay for the above property, viz., to Lyman Prentice $11.45, and James
Cummins $50.00, and some other small demands against said Wightman
which have been contracted for the benefit of the Church in Ramus.

_Saturday, 18_.--I attended the city council, and stated circumstances
which I had heard concerning mobocracy, from a person late from
Macombe, and requested an ordinance passed, so that persons ordering
any person to leave their peaceful homes could be dealt with
rigorously; also presented the following--

    _Expressions of Gratitude to James Gordon Bennett and the New York
    Herald_.

    Resolved by the city council of the city of Nauvoo, that the
    high-minded and honorable editor of the _New York Weekly Herald_,
    James Gordon Bennett, Esq., is deserving of the lasting gratitude
    of this {478} community, for his very liberal and unprejudiced
    course towards us as a people, in giving us a fair hearing in his
    paper, thus enabling us to reach the ears of a portion of the
    community, who, otherwise would ever have remained ignorant of our
    principles and practices.

    Resolved, That we recommend our fellow citizens to subscribe for
    the _New York Weekly Herald_, and thus be found patronizing true
    merit, industry, and enterprise.

_Sunday, 19_.--The Twelve were in council at Elder Brigham
Young's--morning.

Meeting at my house in the evening.

The subjoined minutes are from Elder Wilford Woodruff's journal--

    _Minutes of a Meeting of the Twelve in the House of the Prophet_.

    Elder Heber C. Kimball preached at the house of President Joseph
    Smith, on the parable in the 18th chapter of Jeremiah, of the clay
    in the hands of the potter, that when it marred in the hands of the
    potter it was cut off the wheel and then thrown back again into
    the mill, to go into the next batch, and was a vessel of dishonor;
    but all clay that formed well in the hands of the potter, and was
    pliable, was a vessel of honor; and thus it was with the human
    family, and ever will be: all that are pliable in the hands of God
    and are obedient to His commands, are vessels of honor, and God
    will receive them.

    President Joseph arose and said--"Brother Kimball has given you a
    true explanation of the parable," and then read the parable of the
    vine and its branches, and explained it, and said, "if we keep the
    commandments of God, we should bring forth fruit and be the friends
    of God, and know what our Lord did.

    "Some people say I am a fallen Prophet, because I do not bring
    forth more of the word of the Lord. Why do I not do it? Are we able
    to receive it? No! not one in this room. He then chastened the
    congregation for their wickedness and unbelief, 'for whom the Lord
    loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son and daughter whom
    he receiveth,' and if we do not receive chastisements then we are
    bastards and not sons."

    On the subject of revelation, he said, a man would command his son
    to dig potatoes and saddle his horse, but before he had done either
    he would tell him to do something else. This is all considered
    right; but as soon as the Lord gives a commandment and revokes that
    decree and commands something else, then the Prophet is considered
    fallen. Because we will not receive chastisement at the hand of the
    Prophet and {479} Apostles, the Lord chastiseth us with sickness
    and death. Let not any man publish his own righteousness, for
    others can see that for him; sooner let him confess his sins, and
    then he will be forgiven, and he will bring forth more fruit. When
    a corrupt man is chastised he gets angry and will not endure it.
    The reason we do not have the secrets of the Lord revealed unto us,
    is because we do not keep them but reveal them; we do not keep our
    own secrets, but reveal our difficulties to the world, even to our
    enemies, then how would we keep the secrets of the Lord? I can keep
    a secret till Doomsday. What greater love hath any man than that he
    lay down his life for his friend; then why not fight for our friend
    until we die?

    Elder Brigham Young said--one thing lay with weight on his mind;
    that is, that we should be prepared to keep each commandment as it
    came from the Lord by the mouth of the Prophet, and as the Lord had
    commanded us to build a temple, we should do it speedily.

_Monday, 20_.--I communicated to the _Times and Seasons_, as follows--

    _The Prophet on the Attitude of the Saints in Politics_.

    To My Friends In Illinois--The Gubernatorial Convention of the
    state of Illinois has nominated Colonel Adam W. Snyder [2] for
    Governor, and Colonel John Moore for Lieutenant-Governor, of the
    state of Illinois, election to take place in August next.

    Colonel Moore, like Judge Douglas and Esquire Warren, was an
    intimate friend of General Bennett long before that gentleman
    became a member of our community; and General Bennett informs us
    that no men were {480} more efficient in assisting him to procure
    our great chartered privileges, than were Colonel Snyder, and
    Colonel Moore. They are sterling men, and friends of equal rights,
    opposed to the oppressor's grasp, and the tyrant's rod. With
    such men at the head of our State, government will have nothing
    to fear. In the next canvass, we shall be influenced by no party
    consideration, and no Carthagenian coalescence or collusion with
    our people will be suffered to effect, or operate against General
    Bennett, or any other of our tried friends, already semi-officially
    in the field; so the partizans in this county, who expect to divide
    the friends of humanity and equal rights, will find themselves
    mistaken--we care not a fig for Whig or Democrat; they are both
    alike to us, but we shall go for our friends, our tried friends,
    and the cause of human liberty, which is the cause of God. We
    are aware that "divide and conquer" is the watchword with many,
    but with us it cannot be done--we love liberty too well--we have
    suffered too much to be easily duped--we have no catspaws amongst
    us. We voted for General Harrison because we loved him--he was a
    gallant officer and a tried statesman; but this is no reason why
    we should always be governed by his friends. He is now dead, and
    all of his friends are not ours. We claim the privilege of freemen,
    and shall act accordingly. Douglas is a master spirit, and his
    friends are our friends--we are willing to cast our banners in
    the air, and fight by his side in the cause of humanity and equal
    rights--the cause of liberty and the law. Snyder and Moore are his
    friends--they are ours. These men are free from the prejudices
    and superstitions of the age, and such men we love, and such men
    will ever receive our support, be their political predilections
    what they may. Snyder and Moore are known to be our friends; their
    friendship is vouched for by those whom we have tried. We will
    never be justly charged with the sin of ingratitude--they have
    served us, and we will serve them. [3]

    Joseph Smith.

    Lieutenant-General of the Nauvoo Legion.

{481} _Tuesday, 21_.--I received from Edward Hunter a letter on
business, to which I wrote the following reply--

    _The Prophet's Letter to Edward Hunter--Business Affairs at Nauvoo_.

    Nauvoo, Dec. 21, 1841.

    _Mr. Edward Hunter_,

    Beloved Brother:--Yours of the 27th of October came to hand at
    a late date, but I am now able to say to you that the power of
    attorney is executed and sent up to the clerk's office for the seal
    of the state, and {482} will be forwarded direct from them; it is
    now on the way most probably.

    Your letter did not arrive till after Mr. Potter returned with the
    goods, which I received in safety; and Brother Potter has started
    on a mission to the inhabitants of Jamaica, one of the West India
    isles.

    I will accept the goods as you propose, on your debt, so far as it
    goes, and answer the remainder on the payments which you mention,
    as they become due.

    I have purchased ninety acres of timber land in the vicinity
    of Nauvoo, a little up the river, and have made proposals to
    McFall, but as yet, am waiting for him to receive answers from his
    correspondent in the east. I shall be able to purchase all the wood
    land you will want, in a little time.

    As respects steam engines and mills, my opinion is, we cannot have
    too many of them. This place has suffered exceedingly from the want
    of such mills in our midst, and neither one nor two can do the
    business of this place another season. We have no good grain or
    board mill in this place; and most of our flour and lumber has to
    be brought twenty miles; which subjects us to great inconvenience.

    The city is rapidly advancing, many new buildings have been erected
    since you left us, and many more would have arisen, if brick and
    lumber could have been obtained. There is scarcely any limits which
    can be imagined to the mills and machinery and manufacturing of all
    kinds which might be put into profitable operation in this city,
    and even if others should raise a mill before you get here, it need
    be no discouragement either to you or Brother Buckwalter, for it
    will be difficult for the mills to keep pace with the growth of
    the place, and you will do well to bring the engine. If you can
    persuade any of the brethren who are manufacturers of woollens or
    cottons to come on and establish their business, do so.

    I have not ascertained definitely as yet how far the goods will go
    towards liquidating Dr. Fosters's note, or finishing your house;
    but this I can say, I will make the most of it, and benefit you
    every possible way.

    Your message is delivered to Mrs. Smith, and she will be glad
    to have returns on her letter of attorney, as speedily as
    circumstances will permit, according to the understanding thereof.

    I am happy to hear of your welfare, and the health of your family;
    and also to inform you that the health of Nauvoo has much improved
    since last summer, and considering the very mild state of the
    weather most of the time, it is excellent.

    Myself and family are in health, and our enemies are at peace with
    us, as much as can be expected in this generation. Should anything
    {483} new occur, which may be for our advantage, you will please
    write, and I will do the same. I remain, yours in the Gospel of
    Christ,

    Joseph Smith.

    P.S.--You will endeavor to have the money on your letter of
    attorney from Mrs. Smith, ready to furnish a fresh supply of goods
    early in the spring. J. S.

_Wednesday, 22_.

    Nauvoo, December 22, 1841.

    _Revelation to John Snyder and Amos B. Fuller_.

    The word of the Lord came unto Joseph the Seer, verily thus saith
    the Lord, let my servant John Snyder take a mission to the eastern
    continent, unto all the conferences now sitting in that region; and
    let him carry a package of epistles, that shall be written by my
    servants the Twelve making known unto them their duties concerning
    the building of my houses which I have appointed unto you, saith
    the Lord, that they may bring their gold and their silver, and
    their precious stones, and the box-tree, and the fir-tree, and all
    fine wood to beautify the place of my sanctuary, saith the Lord;
    and let him return speedily with all means which shall be put into
    his hands, even so. Amen.

Elder Amos B. Fuller, of Zarahemla, stated to me that he had settled
all his debts, made all necessary provision for his family, and desired
to know the will of God concerning him.

    _Revelation_.

    "Verily thus saith the Lord unto my servants the Twelve, let them
    appoint unto my servant A. B. Fuller a mission to preach my Gospel
    unto the children of men, as it shall be manifested unto them by my
    Holy Spirit. Amen."

This day I commenced receiving the first supply of groceries at the
new store. Thirteen wagons arrived from Warsaw, loaded with sugar,
molasses, glass, salt, tea, coffee, &c., purchased in St. Louis. The
original stock purchased in New Orleans having been detained at St.
Louis by one Holbrook, innkeeper, under false pretenses.

[Sidenote: Work on the Proclamation to Kings of the Earth.]

This evening I commenced giving instructions to the scribe concerning
writing the {484} proclamation to the kings of the earth, mentioned in
the revelation given January 19, 1841.

[Sidenote: Immigration Agency in England.]

_Friday, 24_.--This evening I had a consultation with President Young
and Bishop Whitney about establishing an agency in England for the
cheap and expeditious conveyance of the Saints to Nauvoo, and for our
convenience in merchandise; and I said, "in the name of the Lord we
will prosper, if we will go forward in this thing."

Elder Truman Gillett, Jun., returned from a short mission to Van Buren
county, Iowa, where he baptized fourteen, bringing $20 as a donation to
the building of the Temple, from Samuel Moore.

[Sidenote: Xmas at Nauvoo, 1841.]

_Saturday, 25_.--Being Christmas, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball,
Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, and their wives, and
Willard Richards spent the evening at Hiram Kimball's; and after
supper, Mr. Kimball gave each of the Twelve Apostles a fractional lot
of land lying on the west side of his second addition to Nauvoo.

Alpheus Gifford, a member of the Church since 1831, and a faithful
Elder in the Church [it was he who baptized Heber C. Kimball] died at
his home some five miles above Nauvoo. [4]

    _Conference Minutes--New York and Maine_.

    At a conference held in Batavia, Genessee county, New York, 11
    branches, comprising 15 Elders, 7 Priests, 7 Teachers, 4 Deacons,
    and 207 members were represented.

    A conference met in the Universalist Church, in Hope, Waldo {485}
    county, Maine, when Fox Islands, with five Elders, 1 Priest, 2
    Teachers, 1 Deacon, and 100 members, also the Main Land, with
    6 Elders, 2 Priests, 3 Teachers, 1 Deacon, and 68 members were
    represented; Otis Shaw, president, and Calvin C. Pendleton, clerk.

[Sidenote: Purpose of the Gift of Tongues.]

_Sunday, 26_.--The public meeting of the Saints was at my house this
evening, and after Patriarch Hyrum Smith and Elder Brigham Young had
spoken on the principles of faith, and the gifts of the Spirit, I read
the 13th chapter of First Corinthians, also a part of the 14th chapter,
and remarked that the gift of tongues was necessary in the Church;
but that if Satan could not speak in tongues, he could not tempt a
Dutchman, or any other nation, but the English, for he can tempt the
Englishman, for he has tempted me, and I am an Englishman; but the gift
of tongues by the power of the Holy Ghost in the Church, is for the
benefit of the servants of God to preach to unbelievers, as on the day
of Pentecost. When devout men from every nation {486} shall assemble
to hear the things of God, let the Elders preach to them in their own
mother tongue, whether it is German, French, Spanish or "Irish," or any
other, and let those interpret who understand the language spoken, in
their own mother tongue, and this is what the Apostle meant in First
Corinthians xiv: 27. [5]

[Sidenote: Instructions to the Twelve.]

_Monday, 27_.--I was in council with Brothers Brigham Young, Heber C.
Kimball, Willard Richards and John Taylor, at my office, instructing
them in the principles of the kingdom, and what the Twelve should do in
relation to the mission of John Snyder, and the European conferences,
so as to forward the gathering of means for building the Temple and
Nauvoo House; that Brigham might go with John Snyder on his mission if
he chose, but the object of the mission could be accomplished without.

_Tuesday, 28_.--I baptized Sidney Rigdon in the font, for and in behalf
of his parents; also baptized Reynolds Cahoon and others.

[Sidenote: Warren and Warsaw Affairs.]

_Thursday and Friday, December 30th and 31st_--Calvin A. Warren, Esq.,
Mark Aldrich and Daniel S. Witter, visited me at my office, and after
much explanation and conversation concerning Warren and Warsaw, In
which Esquire Warren manifested the kindest and most confidential
feelings and Aldrich and Witter expressed their entire approbation of
past proceedings of the Presidency, they all agreed that if I did not
succeed in the next attempt to establish and build up Warren, that
they would fully excuse me from all censure, and would feel satisfied
that I had done all that could reasonably be required of any man in a
like case, be the consequence what it might to themselves; and Esquire
Warren frankly acknowledged that his temporal salvation depended on
the success of the enterprise, and {487} made liberal proposals for
the benefit of the brethren, to help forward the undertaking. The
party retired manifesting the best of feeling, and expressing the most
perfect satisfaction with their visit, with me and all concerned.

[Sidenote: A Prophecy Respecting Warsaw.]

Thursday evening at the office, while conversing with Calvin A. Warren,
Esq., about the proceedings at Warsaw, I prophesied in the name of the
Lord, that the first thing toward building up Warsaw was to break it
down, to break down them that are there, that it never would be built
up till it was broken down, and after that keep them entirely in the
dark concerning our movements; and it is best to let Sharp [6] publish
what he pleases and go to the devil, and the more lies he prints the
sooner he will get through; not buy him out or hinder him; and after
they have been in the dark long enough, let a certain set of men go
there who will do as I tell them, a certain kind of men, some of those
capitalists from the Eastern States, say from Pennsylvania; wise men
who will take the lead of business, and go ahead of those that are
there before they know what we are about, and the place will prosper,
and not till then.

The following list shows some of the books, pamphlets, letters, &c.,
published for and against the Latter-day Saints in 1841.

    _Mormon Literature, (pro et con) 1841_.

    "A Proclamation to the Saints Scattered Abroad:" January 15, by
    Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith.

    Twenty-three numbers of the "Times and Seasons," published at
    Nauvoo.

    Twelve numbers of the "Millennial Star," published in England by
    Parley P. Pratt.

    First European edition of the Book of Mormon, published in England,
    21st January, by Elders Brigham Young, and Willard Richards.

    {488} A third edition of the "Voice of Warning" was published in
    Manchester, England, by Parley P. Pratt.

    "A Letter to Queen Victoria of England, Touching the Signs of the
    Times, and the Political Destiny of the World:" in pamphlet form,
    by Parley P. Pratt, Manchester, England.

    Five hundred copies of "An Address to the Hebrews," in the Dutch
    language, by Orson Hyde. Published in Rotterdam, Holland, in July;
    being the first pamphlet pertaining to the Church of Jesus Christ
    of Latter-day Saints, written in a foreign language.

    A pamphlet containing 116 pages, 8vo., by Orson Hyde, containing "A
    Synopsis of the Faith of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
    Saints:" addressed to the German nation in their own language.

    A Small Collection of Hymns, by Christopher Merkley.

    "Evidences in Proof of the Book of Mormon:" a work of 256 pages, 32
    mo. Published at Batavia, New York, by Charles Thompson.

    A lengthy "Address to the Citizens of Salem, Massachusetts, and
    Vicinity," by Erastus Snow, and Benjamin Winchester, October.

    "Gospel Reflector," a monthly periodical, by Benjamin Winchester,
    published in Philadelphia.

    "Proclamation and Warning to the Inhabitants of America," by
    Charles Thompson.

    The editor of the "Times and Seasons" noticed the following "From
    the 'Upper Mississippian,' a series of letters, entitled 'Nauvoo
    Mormon Religion,' &c., the writer no doubt intended to give a fair
    statement, and in the main did so; but respecting our faith (on
    some points), the Book of Mormon, &c., he is wide of the mark."

    An article published in the "North Staffordshire Mercury," showing
    the difference between the Baptists and Latter-day Saints.
    Hanley, February, 16, signed "A Baptist." Replied to by Parley
    P. Pratt, who showed the difference between the Baptists and
    Former-day-Saints.

    A severe article against the Latter-day Saints, which filled
    several columns of fine print, was published in "Edinburgh
    Intelligencer" of April 7th, taken from the "Athenaeum" on the
    subject of the "Book of Mormon and the Latter-day Saints." Replied
    to by Parley P. Pratt. May.

    Mr. J. B. Rollo, of Edinburgh, Scotland, published a pamphlet
    entitled "Mormonism Exposed." Replied to by Parley P. Pratt, July
    10.

    The "Preston Chronicle" of April 24, published a long article
    against the Latter-day Saints, which was replied to by Parley P.
    Pratt, in the "Millennial Star," July 10.

    A bitter article was published in the "Cheltenham Free Press" of
    {489} August 23rd, headed "Latter-day Saints' Swindle," replied to
    by Parley P. Pratt in the "Star" of October.

    "A Few Plain Facts, Showing the Folly, Wickedness and Imposition of
    the Rev. Timothy R. Matthews." By George J. Adams, Bedford, England.

    The St. Louis, Missouri, "Atlas" published a favorable article
    entitled, "The Latter-day Saints."

    The "Juliet Courier" published a favorable account of the late
    trial of Joseph Smith. Monmouth, June.

    The "Philadelphia Saturday Courier" and the "Public Ledger" on July
    10, published several articles anathematizing the Latter-day Saints.

    A slanderous pamphlet entitled "Mormonism Unmasked," by A. Gardner,
    of Rochdale, England.

    "The Mormons--Arrest of Joe Smith" was the heading of an article
    published in the "New York Herald of Commerce," and copied in many
    of the Eastern papers.

    "The Christian Messenger and Reformer" published an account of the
    Latter-day Saints, collected from the book of Edward D. Howe, of
    Painsville, Ohio.

    Thomas Sharp, editor of the "Warsaw Signal," devoted his entire
    time to slandering, to lying against and misrepresenting the
    Latter-day Saints.

Footnotes:

1. On the corner of Granger and Water streets, in the southwest part of
the city.

2. Governor Ford, in his "History of Illinois," gives the following
biographical information about Adam W. Snyder, and as I can find
nothing concerning him elsewhere, I quote Ford:--

"In December, 1841, a state Democratic convention assembled at
Springfield, and nominated Adam W. Snyder as the Democratic candidate
for governor, to be elected in August, 1842. Mr. Snyder was a native
of Pennsylvania, and a distant relative of Gov. Snyder of that state.
In his early youth, he learned the trade of a fuller and woolcarder.
He came to Illinois when he was about eighteen years old; settled
in the French village of Cahokia: followed his trade for several
years: studied law; removed to the county seat, where he commenced
his profession, in which he was successful in getting practice. In
1830 he was elected to the State Senate, and was afterwards elected
to Congress, from his district; and was again elected to the State
Senate in 1840. Mr. Snyder was a very showy, plausible and agreeable
man in conversation, and was gifted with a popular eloquence, which was
considerably effective. He was a member of the Senate when the Mormon
charters were passed, and had taken an active part in furthering their
passage." In fact Mr. Snyder was chairman of the Judiciary committee,
to which the charters were referred, and he reported them to the Senate
with a recommendation that they pass.

3. For some time there had been an agitation going on in respect
of the Saints and their relationship to the politics of the State;
and political capital was sought to be made by manifestations of
friendliness or of hostility towards them. Although, in the main, the
people of Nauvoo had sustained the Whig candidates, both locally and
nationally, in the preceding election, including the Whig candidate for
Congress, Mr. John J. Stuart, yet there were outbreaks against them
both among the Whig politicians and in the Whig press of Illinois. "The
Whig newspapers," writes Governor Ford, in his "History of Illinois,"
"teemed with accounts of the wonders and enormities of Nauvoo, and of
the awful wickedness of a party which could consent to receive the
support of such miscreants. Governor Duncan, [nominated in opposition
to Snyder] who was really a brave, honest man, and who had nothing to
do with getting the Mormon charters passed through the legislature,
took the stump on this subject in good earnest, and expected to be
elected governor almost on this question alone" (History of Illinois,
Ford, p. 269.)

The position of the Saints in their relation to the political parties
in the state of Illinois is tersely set forth by the late President
John Taylor in his review of affairs at Nauvoo, leading up to the
martyrdom of the Prophet; which document was prepared at the request of
the Historians of the Church, and filed in the archives of the Church
as the testimony of an eye witness and participant in those events.
The document, under the title of "The Martyrdom of Joseph Smith," was
published by permission of the author in Tyler's "History of the Mormon
Battalion." Of the political situation at Nauvoo--which was forming
at the period to which the political announcement of the text above
belongs--President Taylor says:

"There were always two parties, the Whigs and Democrats, and we could
not vote for one without offending the other; and it not unfrequently
happened that candidates for office would place the issue of their
election upon opposition to the 'Mormons,' in order to gain political
influence from religious prejudice, in which case the 'Mormons' were
compelled, in self-defense, to vote against them, which resulted almost
invariably against our opponents. This made them angry; and although
it was of their own making, and the 'Mormons' could not be expected
to do otherwise, yet they raged on account of their discomfiture, and
sought to wreak their fury on the 'Mormons.' As an instance of the
above, when Joseph Duncan was candidate for the office of governor of
Illinois, [in the campaign to which the document in the body of the
text above relates] he pledged himself to his party that, if he could
be elected, he would exterminate or drive the 'Mormons' from the state.
The consequence was that Governor Ford was elected." (History of the
Mormon Battalion, Introduction, pp. 12 and 13.)

It cannot in truth be claimed that any favor shown by the Democratic
party, as such, to the Mormon people was the cause of the announcement
of the above independent attitude in politics. For while Judge Douglas,
a leading Democrat, had recently rendered a decision favorable to the
Prophet, liberating him from the clutches of Missouri, it should be
remembered that the Judge had but pronounced upon the course of the
officers of the states of Missouri and Illinois and found that course
at variance with the law, and there was no alternative but to set
the Prophet free. But it was the law that vindicated Joseph Smith,
not the favor of Judge Douglas. And then, if a Democratic Judge had
decided a case in favor of the Prophet, it should be remembered that
it was the act, and I might say the unwarranted, the illegal act, of a
Democrat, Governor Carlin, which had put the life and liberty of the
Prophet in jeopardy by issuing an illegal requisition for his arrest
and deliverance to Missouri, This to show that it was not any favor
that had been shown by the Democratic party, as such, that prompted
the assumption of an independent attitude in politics by the Prophet;
but that for weal or woe, the attitude was taken as a measure of
self-defense, and for the protection of the people in whose interest it
was announced.

4. Alpheus Gifford was born in Adams township, Berkshire county,
Massachusetts, August 25, 1793. At the age of eighteen, having scarcely
sufficient learning to enable him to read the Bible, he commenced
preaching the Gospel, not for hire, but for the salvation of souls.

In 1817, he married Anna Nash, who bore him seven sons and three
daughters. In the spring of 1831, hearing of the doctrines taught by
Joseph Smith, he made diligent inquiry, and found they were scriptural,
and was baptized and ordained a priest; he brought home five Books of
Mormon which he distributed among his friends; he was then living in
Tioga county, Pennsylvania. Soon after he went to Kirtland, Ohio, to
see the Prophet Joseph Smith and the brethren, when he was ordained an
Elder; he was accompanied by his brother Levi Elial Strong, Eleazar
Miller, Enos Curtis and Abraham Brown, who were baptized. On returning
to Pennsylvania he preached and baptized many, among whom was Heber C.
Kimball. The gifts of the Gospel were enjoyed by many; signs following
those that believed, devils were cast out; the sick were healed; many
prophesied; some spake with new tongues; while others interpreted the
same. Mr. Calvin Gilmour, with whom Brother Gifford had previously been
associated in preaching, heard him speak in tongues and interpret.
Gilmour declared he understood the languages and that they were
interpreted correctly, but that he would rather be damned than believe
in Mormonism.

In June, 1832, Brother Gifford started for Missouri; traveled to
Cincinnati and wintered there with a few Saints, who had been baptized
by Lyman Wight. He arrived in Jackson county, Mo., in March, 1833,
where he preached much. He was driven with the saints in the fall
of that year. He removed to Clay county, and subsequently went to
Kirtland, Ohio, and attended the dedication of the Temple and received
the ordinances there administered. He returned to Missouri, and removed
with the Saints to Far West, Caldwell county. In the winter of 1839
he was driven from Missouri. He located in the Morley settlement near
Lima, Illinois, and subsequently removed five miles above Nauvoo, where
he died December 25, 1841. (The above is taken from a sketch of his
father's life by Samuel K. Gifford, furnished the Church Historian in
November, 1861, and filed in the History of the Church under date of
December, 1841.)

5. "If any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it be by two, at the
most by three, and that by course, and let one interpret. But if there
be no interpreter, let him keep silence in the Church; and let him
speak to himself and to God."

6. This reference is to Thomas Sharp, editor of the Warsaw _Signal_, a
bitter anti-Mormon, and described by the late President John Taylor, as
"a violent and unprincipled man, who shrank not from any enormity."

{490}



CHAPTER XXIX.

The Opening of the Year 1842--Whereabouts of the Twelve
Apostles--Correspondence of Elder Hyde from Trieste--Report of High
Council on Affairs in Nauvoo--Events and Conditions in British Mission.

[Sidenote: Sundry Labors of the Prophet.]

_Saturday, January 1, 1842_.--I again have the pleasure to report the
location of the Twelve Apostles. Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball,
Orson Pratt, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff and Willard Richards are in
Nauvoo. George A. Smith, in Zarahemla, Ohio. Orson Hyde in quarantine
at Trieste, Italy. Parley P. Pratt in Liverpool. Lyman Wight in Ohio.
William Smith in New Jersey. John E. Page somewhere in the Eastern
States.

I commenced placing goods on the shelves of my new store, assisted by
Bishop Newel K. Whitney and others; and in the evening attended city
council.

Five hundred and twelve Saints were reported at the Glasgow Conference
of this date.

Several of the Twelve spent the day at Sylvester B. Stoddard's and in
the city council, which lasted from 6 p. m. until midnight, on the
trial of Gustavus Hills.

_Sunday, 2_.--Meeting at my house, day and evening; Brother Hyrum and
Elder Woodruff preached.

_Tuesday, 4_.--I wrote Dr. John M. Bernhisel, of New York, on business.

Joseph Duncan, candidate for Governor of Illinois, made an inflammatory
speech against the Saints at Edwardsville, a mass of falsehoods.

{491} _Wednesday, 5_.--William Wightman signed over and delivered the
town plat of Ramus to me, as sole Trustee in Trust for the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

My new store was opened for business this day for the first time, it
was filled with customers, and I was almost continually behind the
counter, as clerk, waiting on my friends.

I dictated a letter to Edward Hunter, West Nantmeal, Pennsylvania, as
follows:

    _The Prophet's Letter to Edward Hunter--Reports Opening of the New
    Store_.

    Nauvoo, January 5, 1842.

    _Mr. Edward Hunter_.

    Beloved Brother:--I am happy that it is my privilege to say to you
    that the large new building which I had commenced when you were
    here is now completed, and the doors are opened this day for the
    sale of goods for the first time. The foundation of the building is
    somewhat spacious (as you will doubtless recollect) for a country
    store.

    The principal part of the building below, which is ten feet high,
    is devoted exclusively to shelves and drawers, except one door
    opening back into the space, on the left of which are the cellar
    and chamber stairs, and on the right the counting room; from the
    space at the top of the chamber stairs opens a door into the large
    front room of the same size with the one below, the walls lined
    with counters, covered with reserved goods.

    In front of the stairs opens the door to my private office, or
    where I keep the sacred writings, with a window to the south,
    overlooking the river below, and the opposite shore for a great
    distance, which, together with the passage of boats in the season
    thereof, constitutes a peculiarly interesting situation, in
    prospect, and no less interesting from its retirement from the
    bustle and confusion of the neighborhood and city, and altogether
    is a place the Lord is pleased to bless.

    The painting of the store has been executed by Edward Martin, one
    of our English brethren; and the counters, drawers, and pillars
    present a very respectable representation of oak, mahogany and
    marble for a backwoods establishment.

    The Lord has blessed our exertions in a wonderful manner, and
    although some individuals have succeeded in detaining goods to a
    considerable amount for the time being, yet we have been enabled to
    secure goods in the building sufficient to fill all the shelves as
    soon as they were completed, and have some in reserve, both in loft
    and cellar.

    {492} Our assortment is tolerably good--very good, considering the
    different purchases made by different individuals at different
    times, and under circumstances which controlled their choice to
    some extent; but I rejoice that we have been enabled to do as well
    as we have, for the hearts of many of the poor brethren and sisters
    will be made glad with those comforts which are now within their
    reach.

    The store has been filled to overflowing, and I have stood behind
    the counter all day, dealing out goods as steady as any clerk you
    ever saw, to oblige those who were compelled to go without their
    usual Christmas and New Year's dinners, for the want of a little
    sugar, molasses, raisins, &c., &c; and to please myself also, for I
    love to wait upon the Saints, and be a servant to all, hoping that
    I may be exalted in the due time of the Lord.

    With sentiments of high consideration, I remain your brother in
    Christ.

    Joseph Smith.

[Sidenote: Rejoicing of the Prophet.]

_Thursday, 6_.--The new year has been ushered in and continued thus far
under the most favorable auspices, and the Saints seem to be influenced
by a kind and indulgent Providence in their dispositions and [blessed
with] means to rear the Temple of the Most High God, anxiously looking
forth to the completion thereof as an event of the greatest importance
to the Church and the world, making the Saints in Zion to rejoice, and
the hypocrite and sinner to tremble. Truly this is a day long to be
remembered by the Saints of the last days,--a day in which the God of
heaven has begun to restore the ancient order of His kingdom unto His
servants and His people,--a day in which all things are concurring to
bring about the completion of the fullness of the Gospel, a fullness
of the dispensation of dispensations, even the fullness of times; a
day in which God has begun to make manifest and set in order in His
Church those things which have been, and those things which the ancient
prophets and wise men desired to see but died without beholding them;
a day in which those things begin to be made manifest, which have
been hid from before the foundation of the world, and which {493}
Jehovah has promised should be made known in His own due time unto
His servants, to prepare the earth for the return of His glory, even
a celestial glory, and a kingdom of Priests and kings to God and the
Lamb, forever, on Mount Zion, and with him the hundred and forty and
four thousand whom John the Revelator saw, all of which is to come to
pass in the restitution of all things.

Conference held at Zarahemla, at which that stake was discontinued;
a branch was organized in place thereof, and John Smith appointed
president.

_Wednesday, 12_.--The ship _Tremont_ sailed from Liverpool for New
Orleans with the Saints, about this time.

The following notice was published in the _Times and Seasons_:

    _Tithings and Consecrations for the Temple of the Lord_.

    From this time the Recorder's Office will be opened on the Saturday
    of each week for the reception of the tithings and consecrations
    of the brethren, and closed on every other day of the week. This
    regulation is necessary, to give the Trustee and Recorder time to
    arrange the Book of Mormon, translation of the Bible, Hymn Book,
    and Doctrine and Covenants for the press, all of which the brethren
    are anxious to see in their most perfect form, consequently the
    Saints should be particular to bring their offerings on the day
    specified, until further notice, but not relax their exertions to
    carry on the work.

    The Elders will please give the above notice in all public meetings
    until the plan is understood.

    Willard Richards,

    Recorder for the Temple.

    Nauvoo, January 12, 1842.

I rode south about seven miles to my wood land, accompanied by Brother
John Sanders and Peter Maughan, [1] {494} and found a vein of coal
about eighteen inches thick, apparently of good quality for the western
country.

Elder Benjamin Winchester was suspended by the quorum of the Twelve
until he made satisfaction for disobedience to the First Presidency.

_Thursday, 13_.--My clerk, Willard Richards, commenced boarding with me.

The British forces having evacuated Cabul, [2] they were attacked in
the Pass, a few miles from the city, and after three days' fighting;
they were nearly all slaughtered.

[Sidenote: Book of Mormon Corrections.]

_Saturday, 15_.--I commenced reading the Book of Mormon at page 54,
American stereotype edition (the previous pages having been corrected),
for the purpose of correcting the stereotype plates of some errors
which escaped notice in the first edition.

Attended city council, and was appointed on committee of ways and means
and municipal laws.

_Sunday, 16_.--I preached at my house, morning and evening,
illustrating the nature of sin, and showing that it is not right to sin
that grace may abound.

_Monday, 17_.--Transacted a variety of business in the city. Myself and
Brother Willard Richards dined with Sister Agnes M. Smith. [3]

[Sidenote: Meeting with the Twelve.]

In the evening I attended a council of the Twelve at my office;
present, Elders Young, Kimball, Orson Pratt, Taylor, Woodruff, George
A. Smith and Richards--appointed Elder Amos B. Fuller a mission to
Chicago, according to the revelation of the 22nd of December, and Elder
Henry Jacobs to accompany him. The council were unanimously opposed to
{495} Robinson's son's publishing the Book of Mormon and other books.

_Tuesday, 18_.--This day revoked my power of attorney given to Dr.
Isaac Galland to transact business for the Church.

After transacting a variety of business, sleeping an hour from bodily
infirmities, I read for correction in the Book of Mormon, and debated
in the evening with the mayor [John C. Bennett] concerning the
Lamanites and Negroes.

For an extract of a letter from Elder Orson Hyde, "Trieste, January 1
and 18, 1842," see _Millennial Star_, vol. II, pages 166-169. [4]

    Highly Interesting from Jerusalem.

    We have lately received two lengthy and highly interesting
    communications from Elder Orson Hyde, dated at Trieste, January
    1st, and 18th, containing a sketch of his voyages and travels in
    the East, his visit to Jerusalem, a description of ancient Zion,
    the pool of Siloam, and many other places famous in holy writ,
    with several illustrations of the manners and customs of the
    East, as applicable to Scripture texts, and several conversations
    held between himself and some of the Jews, missionaries, etc.,
    in Jerusalem, together with a masterly description of a terrible
    tempest and thunder storm at sea, with a variety of miscellaneous
    reflections and remarks, all written in an easy, elegant, and
    masterly style, partaking of the eloquent and sublime, and
    breathing a tone of that deep feeling, tenderness, and affection so
    characteristic of his mission and the spirit of his holy and sacred
    office.

    Elder Hyde has by the grace of God been the first proclaimer of
    the fullness of the Gospel both on the continent of Europe and in
    far off Asia, among the nations of the East. In Germany, Turkey
    (Constantinople), Egypt, and Jerusalem. He has reared as it were
    the ensign of the latter-day glory, and sounded the trump of truth,
    calling upon the people of those regions to awake from their
    thousand years' slumber, and to make ready for their returning Lord.

    {496} In his travels he has suffered much, and has been exposed to
    toils and dangers, to hunger, pestilence and war. He has been in
    perils by land and sea, in perils among robbers, in perils among
    heathens, Turks, Arabs, and Egyptians; but out of all these things
    the Lord hath delivered him, and hath restored him in safety to the
    shores of Europe, where he is tarrying for a little season, for
    the purpose of publishing the Truth in the German language, having
    already published it in French and English in the various countries
    of the East, and we humbly trust that his labors will be a lasting
    blessing to Jew and Gentile.

    We publish the following extract of his communication, and we shall
    soon issue the whole from the press in pamphlet form. It will, no
    doubt, meet with a ready sale; and we purpose devoting the profits
    to his benefit, to assist him in his mission.

    _Excerpts from Elder Hyde's Letters_.

    "Summoning up, therefore, what little address I had, I procured
    a _valet d'place_, or lackey, and proceeded to the house of Mr.
    Simons, a very respectable Jew, who with some of his family had
    lately been converted and joined the English Church. I entered
    their dwelling. They had just sat down to enjoy a dish of coffee,
    but immediately arose from the table to meet me. I spoke to them
    in German and asked them if they spoke English. They immediately
    replied 'Yes,' which was a very agreeable sound to my ear. They
    asked me in German if I spoke English; I replied, 'Ya, mein Herr.'
    I then introduced myself to them, and with a little apology it
    passed off as well as though I had been introduced by the pasha.
    With that glow of warmth and familiarity which is a peculiar trait
    in the German character, they would have me sit down and take a
    dish with them; and as I began to relate some things relative to
    my mission, the smiles of joy which sat upon their countenances
    bespoke hearts not altogether indifferent. There were two ministers
    of the Church of England there. One was confined to his bed by
    sickness, and the other, a German, and a Jew by birth, soon came
    in. After an introduction, I took the liberty to lay open to him
    some of our principles, and gave him a copy of the communication
    to the Jews in Constantinople to read. After he had it, he said
    that my motives were undoubtedly very good, but questioned the
    propriety of my undertaking from the fact that I claimed God had
    sent me. If, indeed, I had gone to Jerusalem under the direction of
    some missionary board or society, and left God out of the question
    altogether, I should have been received as a celestial messenger.
    How truly did our Savior speak, when He said, 'I am come in my
    Father's name, and ye receive me not; but if another were to come
    in his own name, him ye would receive.' I replied, however, that
    so far as I could know my own heart, {497} my motives were most
    certainly good; yet, said I, no better than the cause which has
    brought me here. But he, like all others who worship a God 'without
    body or parts,' said that miracles, visions, and prophecy had
    ceased.

    "The course which the popular clergy pursue at this time in
    relation to the Divine economy looks to me as though they would
    say, 'O Lord, we will worship Thee with all our hearts, serve
    Thee with all our souls, and be very pious and holy; we will even
    gather Israel, convert the heathen, and bring in the millennium,
    if Thou wilt only let us alone that we may do it in our own way,
    and according to our own will; but if Thou speakest from heaven to
    interfere with our plan, or cause any to see visions or dreams, or
    prophesy, whereby we are disturbed or interrupted in our worship,
    we will exert all our strength and skill to deny what Thou sayest,
    and charge it home upon the devil or some wild, fanatic spirit, as
    being its author.'

    "That which was looked upon by the ancient saints as among the
    greatest favors and blessings, viz., revelation from God and
    communion with Him by dreams and by visions, is now looked upon by
    the religious world as the height of presumption and folly. The
    ancient saints considered their condition most deplorable when
    Jehovah would not speak to them; but the most orthodox religionists
    of this age deem it quite heterodox to even admit the probability
    that He ever will speak again. O my soul! language fails to
    paint the absurdity and abomination of such heaven-opposing and
    truth-excluding dogmas; and were it possible for those bright
    seraphs that surround the throne above, and bask in the sunbeams
    of immortality, to weep over the inconsistency and irrationality
    of mortals, the earth must be bedewed with celestial tears. My
    humble advice to all such is, that they repent and cast far from
    them these wicked traditions, and be baptized into the new and
    everlasting covenant, lest the Lord speak to them in His wrath, and
    vex them in His sore displeasure.

    "After some considerable conversation upon the priesthood and the
    renewal of the covenant, I called upon him [i. e. the aforesaid
    German-Jew church of England minister] to be baptized for the
    remission of his sins, that he might receive the gift of the
    Holy Ghost. 'What' said he, 'I be baptized?' 'Yes,' said I, 'you
    be baptized.' 'Why,' saith he, 'I have been baptized already.'
    I replied something after the following: You have probably been
    sprinkled, but that has no more to do with baptism than any other
    ordinance of man's device; and even if you had been immersed, you
    would not have bettered your condition, for your priesthood is
    without power. If, indeed, the Catholic church has power to give
    you an ordination, and by that ordination confer the priesthood
    upon you, they certainly had power to nullify that act, and take
    the {498} priesthood from you; and this power they exercised when
    you dissented from their communion, by excluding you from their
    church. But, if the Catholic church possessed not the priesthood,
    of course your claims to it are as groundless as the airy phantoms
    of heathen mythology. So, view the question on which side you may,
    there is no possible chance of admitting the validity of your
    claims to it. Be it known, therefore, that ordinances performed
    under the administration of such a priesthood, though they may
    even be correct in form, will be found destitute of the seal of
    that authority by which heaven will recognize His [own] in the day
    when every man's work shall be tried. Though a priesthood may be
    clothed with the wealth and honors of a great and powerful nation
    and command the respect and veneration of multitudes whose eyes are
    blinded by the thick veil of popular opinion, and whose powers of
    reflection and deep thought are confused and lost in the general
    cry of 'Great is Diana of the Ephesians,' yet all this does not
    impart to it the Divine sanction, or animate it with the spirit of
    life and power from the bosom of the living God; and there is a
    period in future time when, in the smoking ruins of Babel's pride
    and glory, it must fall and retire to the shades of forgetfulness,
    to the grief and mortification of its unfortunate votaries.'

    "In consequence of his great volubility, I was under the
    disagreeable necessity of tuning my voice to a pretty high key,
    and of spacing short between words, determining that neither his
    greatness or learning should shield him from the shafts of a
    faithful testimony. But there is more hope of those Jews receiving
    the fullness of the gospel, whose minds have never been poisoned by
    the bane of modern sectarianism, which closes the mouth of Deity
    and shuts up in heaven all the angels, visions, and prophesyings.
    Mrs. Whiting told me that there had been four Jewish people in
    Jerusalem converted and baptized by the English minister, and four
    only; and that a part of the ground for an English church had been
    purchased there. It was by political power and influence that the
    Jewish nation was broken down, and her subjects dispersed abroad;
    and I will here hazard the opinion, that by political power and
    influence they will be gathered and built up; and further, that
    England is destined in the wisdom and economy of heaven to stretch
    forth the arm of political power, and advance in the front ranks
    of this glorious enterprise. The Lord once raised up a Cyrus to
    restore the Jews, but that was not evidence that He owned the
    religion of the Persians. This opinion I submit, however, to your
    superior wisdom to correct if you shall find it wrong.

    "There is an increasing anxiety in Europe for the restoration of
    that people [the Jews]; and this anxiety is not confined to the
    pale of any religious community, but it has found its way to the
    courts of kings. Special {499} ambassadors have been sent, and
    consuls and consular agents have been appointed. The rigorous
    policy which has hitherto characterized the course of other nations
    towards them now begins to be softened by the oil of friendship,
    and modified by the balm of humanity. The sufferings and privations
    under which they have groaned for so many centuries have at length
    touched the main-springs of Gentile power and sympathy; and may the
    God of their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, fan the flame by
    celestial breezes, until Israel's banner, sanctified by a Savior's
    blood, shall float on the walls of old Jerusalem, and the mountains
    and valleys of Judea reverberate with their songs of praise and
    thanksgiving to the Lamb that was slain.

    "The imperial consul of Austria, at Galatz, near the mouth of the
    Danube, to whom I had a letter of introduction from his cousin in
    Vienna, told me that in consequence of so many of their Jewish
    subjects being inclined, of late, to remove to Syria and Palestine,
    his government had established a general consul at Beyroot for
    their protection. There are many Jews who care nothing about
    Jerusalem, and have no regard for God. Their money is the god they
    worship, yet there are many of the most pious and devout among them
    who look towards Jerusalem as the tender and affectionate mother
    looks upon the home where she left her lovely little babe."

_Wednesday, 19_.--I wrote Dr. Galland as follows:

    _The Prophet's Letter to Isaac Galland--On Settlement of Accounts_.

    Dear Sir:--By your reply of the 18th instant to my note of the
    17th, I am led to conclude that you received my communication in
    a manner altogether unintended by me, and that there may be no
    misunderstanding between us, and that you may be satisfied that I
    did not intend, and that I do not now intend anything, only upon
    the principles of the strictest integrity and uprightness before
    God, and to do as I would be done unto, I will state I have become
    embarrassed in my operations to a certain extent, and partly from a
    presentation of notes, which you, as my agent, had given for lands
    purchased in the eastern states, they having been sent to me. I
    have been obliged to cash them, and having no returns from you to
    meet those demands, or even the trifling expenses of your outfit,
    it has placed me in rather an unpleasant situation, and having a
    considerable amount of your scrip on hand, enough, as I suppose, to
    counterbalance the debts due you, and leave a balance in my favor,
    to some extent, even if it were small; and as I was pressed for
    funds, from the causes above mentioned, as well as others, I had
    hoped it would be convenient for you to lend me some assistance at
    the present time, and this was the reason why I sent a messenger to
    you as I did.

    {500} And now, sir, that we may have no misunderstanding in this
    matter, I think we had better have a settlement, and if I am owing
    you, I will pay you as soon as I can, and if you owe me, I shall
    only expect the same in return, for it is an old and trite maxim,
    that short reckonings make long friends. With this view of the
    matter, I would request you to call as soon as you possibly can
    make it convenient, and compare accounts, so that all things may
    be understood most perfectly between us in future time, and that
    all occasion for unpleasant feelings, if any such there be, may be
    entirely obliterated.

    I remain, sir, most respectfully yours, &c.,

    Joseph Smith.

Read in the Book of Mormon, and in the evening visited Bishop Miller's
wife, who was very sick, and the Bishop absent, collecting the funds
for building the Temple and Nauvoo House.

[Sidenote: Isaac Galland Affair.]

_Thursday, 20_.--I attended a special conference of the Church at 10
o'clock a. m., concerning Dr. Galland. The conference voted to sanction
the revocation of Dr. Galland's agency, dated the 18th of January,
as published in the _Times and Seasons_, and also instructed the
trustee-in-trust to proceed with Dr. Galland's affairs in relation to
the Church, as he shall judge most expedient.

Six o'clock evening, attended a special council in the upper room of
the new store.

George Washington Gee died today. [5]

{501} _Friday, 21_.--I read the Book of Mormon, transacted a variety
of business in the store and city, and spent the evening in the office
with Elders Taylor and Richards, interpreting dreams, &c.

The presidents of the different quorums met with the High Council
at Brother Hyrum's office, to receive instructions, according to
appointment of the council on the 18th.

[Sidenote: Seventies' Quorum Affairs.]

President Joseph Young stated the reasons why the quorum of Seventies
had granted licenses; that he applied to President Joseph Smith for
permission, on the solicitations of the quorums; that their reasons
for so doing were because licenses could not be obtained from the
Church clerk. President Joseph Butterfield testified to the same, and
the council was satisfied with the testimony. The council was then
addressed by President Hyrum Smith on the Word of Wisdom.

_Saturday, 22_.--I was very busy in appraising tithing property, and in
the evening revised the rules of the city council, attended council,
and spoke on their adoption, and was elected mayor, _pro tem_. of the
city of Nauvoo.

_Sunday, 23_.--Spent the day mostly at the office, and on the
presentation of charges by Elder William Draper, Jun., silenced Elder
Daniel Wood, of Pleasant Vale, for preaching that the Church ought
to unsheath the sword, and Elder A. Litz for preaching that the
authorities of the Church were done away, &c., and cited him to appear
before the High Council of Nauvoo for trial.

_Monday, 24_.--Reckoned with William and Wilson Law in the counting
room, and examined the lots on which they are about to build a steam,
grain, and sawmill.

_Tuesday, 25_.--Signed deeds for lots, to Law; transacted a variety
of business in the city and office. In the evening debated with John
C. Bennett and others to show that the Indians have greater cause to
complain of the treatment of the whites, than the negroes, or sons of
Cain.

    {502} Nauvoo Legion Headquarters,

    Nauvoo Legion, City Of Nauvoo, Illinois,

    January 23rd, 1842.

    General Orders. All the public arms will be required to be in the
    best possible condition, at the general inspection and parade,
    on the 7th of May proximo, and no deficiency whatever will be
    countenanced, overlooked, or suffered to pass without fine, on that
    occasion. All persons, therefore, holding said arms, will take
    notice, and govern themselves accordingly; and in order that the
    general inspection may pass off in a truly military style, alike
    honorable to the Legion, and creditable to the citizen soldiers,
    the brigadiers are required to attend the battalion parades within
    their respective commands, and inspect said arms in _propria
    personae_, prior to the general parade. Persons disregarding these
    general orders, whether officers or privates, will find themselves
    in the _vocative_. The invincibles (Captain Hunter's company of
    light infantry), will be detailed for fatigue duty, on escorts and
    special service, and will take post by assignment, and receive
    their orders direct from the major general, through his herald
    and armor bearer. His Excellency the Governor of Illinois, the
    circuit judge of the judicial circuit, and the members of the
    bar, the officers of Hancock county, Colonel Williams and Colonel
    Deming, with their respective field and staff officers of the
    Illinois militia, and General Swazey and Colonel Fuller, with their
    respective field and staff officers, and Captain Davis and Avery's
    companies of cavalry of Iowa militia, are respectfully invited to
    attend and participate in the general parade on the 7th May.

    Joseph Smith, Lieutenant General.

_Wednesday, 26_.--Rode out to borrow money, to refund for money
borrowed of John Benbow, as outfit for Dr. Galland in his agency.
Transacted a variety of business, explained scripture to Elder Orson
Spencer in my office, read in the Book of Mormon in the evening. Wrote
a long letter to Edward Hunter, West Nantmeal, on temporal business.

The Church is in a prosperous condition, and the Saints are exerting
themselves to build the Temple. The health of the city is good.

Upwards of twenty-three vessels wrecked on different parts of the
British coast.

_Thursday, 27_.--Attended to baptism in general; in the afternoon, in
council with the recorder, and gave some {503} particular instructions
concerning the order of the kingdom, and the management of business;
placed the carpet given by Carlos Granger on the floor of my office;
and spent the evening in general council in the upper room.

In the course of the day, Brigham Young, and James Ivins returned, and
gave a favorable report from Dr. Galland, with his letter of attorney,
letters and papers which he had received of me and the Church.

_Friday, 28_.--While I was at my office, Emma and Sister Whitney came
in and spent an hour.

I received the following revelation to the Twelve concerning the _Times
and Seasons_, given January 28, 1842--

    _Revelation_.

    Verily thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Joseph, go and say
    unto the Twelve, that it is my will to have them take in hand the
    editorial department of the _Times and Seasons_, according to that
    manifestation which shall be given unto them by the power of my
    Holy Spirit in the midst of their counsel, saith the Lord. Amen.

I also decided that Elder John Snyder should go out on a mission, and
if necessary some one go with him and raise up a church, and get means
to go to England, and carry the epistle required in the revelation
of December 22nd; and instructed the Twelve, Brigham Young, Heber C.
Kimball, Wilford Woodruff and Willard Richards being present, to call
Elder Snyder into their council and instruct him in these things, and
if he will not do these things he shall be cut off from the Church, and
be damned.

Elias Higbee, of the temple committee, came into my office, and I
said unto him; The Lord is not well pleased with you; and you must
straighten up your loins and do better, and your family also; for you
have not been as diligent as you ought to have been, and as spring is
approaching, you must arise and shake yourself, and be active, and make
your children industrious, and help build the Temple.

{504} Elder Snyder had appeared very backward about fulfilling the
revelation concerning him, and felt that he could not do it unless
the Twelve would furnish him means, when he was more able to furnish
his own means, as all the Elders were obliged to do when they went on
missions, or go without.

The High Council heard and accepted the report of their committee of
the 18th instant, as follows--

    _Report of High Council Committee_.

    The High Council of the Church of Jesus Christ to the Saints of
    Nauvoo, greeting--

    Dear Brethren:--As watchmen upon the walls of Zion, we feel it to
    be our duty to stir up your minds, by way of remembrance, of things
    which we conceive to be of the utmost importance to the Saints.

    While we rejoice at the health and prosperity of the Saints, and
    the good feeling which seems to prevail among them generally, and
    their willingness to aid in the building of the "House of the
    Lord," we are grieved at the conduct of some, who seem to have
    forgotten the purpose for which they have gathered.

    Instead of promoting union, they have appeared to be engaged in
    sowing strifes and animosities among their brethren, spreading evil
    reports, brother going to law with brother for trivial causes,
    which we consider a great evil, and altogether unjustifiable,
    except in extreme cases, and then not before the world.

    We feel to advise taking the word of God for our guide, and exhort
    you not to forget that you have come up as saviors upon Mount Zion,
    consequently to seek each other's good--to become one, inasmuch as
    the Lord has said, "Except ye become one, ye are not mine."

    Let us always remember the admonition of the Apostle--"Dare any of
    you, having a matter against another, go to law before the unjust,
    and not before the Saints? Do ye not know the Saints shall judge
    the world? and if the world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy
    to judge the smallest matters? Know ye not that we shall judge
    angels? how much more things that pertain to this life? If, then,
    ye have judgments of things pertaining to this life, set them to
    judge who are least esteemed in the Church. I speak to your shame.
    Is it so, that there is not a wise man among you? no, not one that
    shall be able to judge between his brethren. But brother goeth to
    law with brother, and that before the unbelievers. Now therefore
    there is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to law one with
    another. Why do ye not rather take wrong? {505} why do ye not
    rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded? Nay, ye do wrong, and
    defraud, and that your brethren. Know ye not that the unrighteous
    shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived; neither
    fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor
    abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous,
    nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the
    kingdom of God" (I Cor. 6: 1-10). Who, observing these things,
    would go to law distressing his brother, thereby giving rise to
    hardness, evil speaking, strifes and animosities among those who
    have covenanted to keep the commandments of God--who have taken
    upon them the name of Saints, and if Saints are to judge angels,
    and also to judge the world--why then are they not competent to
    judge in temporal matters, especially in trivial cases, taking the
    law of the Lord for their guide, brotherly kindness, charity, &c.,
    as well as the law of the land? Brethren, these are evils which
    ought not to exist among us. We hope the time will speedily arrive
    when these things will be done away, and everyone stand in the
    office of his calling, as a faithful servant of God, building each
    other up, bearing each other's infirmities, and so fulfill the law
    of Christ.

    _William Marks, President; Samuel Bent, Lewis D. Wilson, David
    Fullmer, Thomas Grover, Newel Knight, Leonard Soby, James Allred,
    Elias Higbee, George W. Harris, Aaron Johnson, William Huntington,
    Sen., Daniel Carrier, Austin Cowles, Charles C. Rich, Counselors_.

    _Attest: Hosea Stout, Clerk_.

Sir Robert Sale [commander of the British forces in Afghanistan]
received a letter from Sha-Shoojah, requiring him to evacuate
Jellalabad, with which he refused to comply.

_Saturday, 29_.--I was much engaged with the tithings; in the afternoon
in my office, counseling various individuals: and in the evening in
council with Brothers Young, Kimball, Richards and others, showing
forth the Kingdom and the order thereof concerning many things, and the
will of God concerning His servants.

    _Letter of G. Walker to Elder Brigham Young et al.--Affairs in
    England since Departure of the Apostles_.

    Manchester, England, Jan. 29, 1842.

    _To President Young, Elders Kimball and Richards_.

    Beloved Brethren:--Soon after your departure, a clergyman of the
    {506} church of England called upon my employer, to request that
    he might have an interview with me, as he had a wish to propound
    certain questions to me; upon his request being complied with,
    we retired to a private room, when he produced a long list of
    questions, written down, opposite to which he wrote my answers.
    The rise of the Church, Priesthood, doctrines offices, sacraments,
    &c., were the principal queries he advanced. When he demurred
    to any of our principles I was proceeding to explain, he cut my
    discourse short by saying he would not hold any controversy, his
    object being only to obtain information. After the disposal of his
    queries, he wished to be informed where he could obtain the whole
    of the publications of the Latter-day Saints, as he wished to be in
    possession of them; I informed him at 47 Oxford street, Manchester,
    and he promised to send for them.

    Soon after the visit of this reverend gentleman, I had reason to
    suspect that undermining operations were in progress against me, I
    therefore tendered my resignation to the directors, but they would
    not accept it; and very soon after a public accountant was employed
    by them to investigate their accounts for several years back, and I
    was happy to be able to answer satisfactorily every question that
    was asked of me respecting them.

    After this another minister sent a lengthy article extracted from
    an American paper, purporting to be the production of a Mr. Anthon,
    with a request that I would "read, mark, learn, and inwardly
    digest" the same. I replied to the statements of Mr. Anthon, and
    after disposing of them paragraph for paragraph, I told him that I
    was obliged by his favoring me with it, inasmuch as it satisfied
    my mind, and was confirmatory of the prediction of Isaiah being
    fulfilled, seeing that Mr. Anthon admitted that "the words of
    the book were delivered to the learned," &c. I then proceeded to
    contrast the church of England with churches established by the
    Apostles; but he has not acknowledged the receipt of my letter as
    yet. The clergy are building ten new churches in this town and
    neighborhood, and are employing additional curates to go round to
    the houses of their parishoners, to coerce or intimidate them into
    an attendance upon their services in fulfillment of the words of
    Paul, In the last days perilous times will come, &c., that they
    would have a form of godliness, but deny the power, and would creep
    into houses to lead captive silly women, &c. (See II Timothy, 1st
    chapter, 1st to 8th verses.) These curates make repeated visits,
    generally when the heads of families are from home, and take
    special care to enquire where the family are employed, and what
    place of worship they attend, &c., and leave tracts for the family
    to read.

    One of the Rev. Hugh Stowell's curates has paid several visits to
    my house, but always in my absence, although he was requested to
    call {507} when I was at home, and informed of the time when he
    might meet with me.

    The following discourse took place in our own neighborhood: Curate:
    What religion may you be, my good woman? I am a churchwoman, sir.
    What church do you usually attend? I never attend any, sir.

    After reprimanding the woman for pretending to be one of his flock,
    while she absented herself from the fold, he went to the house of a
    poor woman who had lately joined the Saints. I am a minister of the
    Church of Jesus Christ in England, and have called to inquire what
    school you send your children to, and what religion you profess?
    The woman replied she was a "Latter-day Saint." "Oh! delusion,
    delusion!" he rejoined, and began to rail against the Saints,
    whereupon she handed him the Bible, and requested him to read the
    place where she casually opened to, namely the third chapter of
    Micah, and to preach a discourse from that part of the Bible; but
    he retreated from before her and has not troubled her since.

    The Lord Bishop of Chester and the Protestant clergymen, have hired
    a person of the name of Brindley to go about lecturing against
    the Saints, and have commenced a monthly periodical in which the
    foul slanders heaped upon the Saints in America and elsewhere are
    retailed out to satisfy the malice of the enemies of truth. The
    _Manchester Courier_ has had several articles against our society
    and principles, and the old Spaulding romance has been resuscitated
    for the occasion. The Rev. Charles Burton, Doctor of Laws, minister
    of "All Saints," has been several times to see me lately, and upon
    one occasion invited me to his house, where I went and discussed
    our principles for several hours, until he was glad to withdraw
    from the contest; I found him ignorant in a great measure of what
    the Bible contains respecting the latter-days. He admitted that the
    Saints would reign on earth.

    The great work of the Lord is still progressing in spite of all the
    opposition of lying priests and their auxiliaries of the newspaper
    press. I baptized Elizabeth Smith, who resided with us when you
    were in England, and she purposes coming out to America along with
    us.

    There is very great distress among the operatives and the poor
    generally, and great excitement respecting the agitation of the
    repeal of the corn laws. Great fires have frequently occurred at
    the commencement of this year; a large carrier's warehouse was
    consumed by fire, about from 200,000 to 300,000 ($1,000,000 to
    $1,500,000) worth of cotton and grain, &c., destroyed. It was the
    Union Company's carrying ware house, Piccadilly. There is great
    depression in almost every branch of manufactures, and great
    perplexity; and I am daily more and more convinced that the time
    is not far distant when Babylon the great will be {508} fallen and
    become a desolation, and the kings and the merchants of the earth
    will weep and mourn over her, and she will be cast down, even as a
    great mill-stone cast into the sea, and will be found no more at
    all.

    I opened a place for preaching at Blakesley, about six week's ago;
    and there were three baptized and confirmed there last week. I was
    with Elder John Brotherton at Middleton on Sunday last, where he
    and Elder Hardman had obtained a room to preach to the Chartists.
    [6] We have also a place opened at Disbury and Heaton.

    About three weeks ago there was a letter inserted in the
    _Manchester Courier_, by a writer who signs himself R. P., calling
    upon the clergymen of the church of England, and the respectable
    inhabitants, and the most respectable and intelligent of the
    police, to attend our meetings at the Carpenters' Hall, as they had
    fondly hoped that the system would have fallen to the ground by the
    weight of its own absurdity; but they found that there was method
    and consistency in the apparent madness of these deluded people,
    and that experience had taught them that such expectations were
    vain; as they had observed that there was considerable consistency
    displayed, and method attending our arrangements, there being
    an emigration office established in this town, &c. The writer
    suspected there was a genuine American trick being practiced by the
    interested parties at the head of the system, to decoy the ignorant
    and unwary to perish in the swamps of New Orleans, and that they
    were draining the country of their best artists; and it was high
    time some steps were taken to put a stop to such practices.

    We have since discovered that the writer is no other than Robert
    {509} Philips, Esq., an extensive manufacturer and merchant,
    brother to Mark Philips, Esq., another great manufacturer and
    member of parliament for the Borough of Manchester. The editor of
    the _Courier_ has been playing upon the same string for several
    weeks since, and feels satisfied that from the exposure he has
    given the whole system, it must inevitably die away. He was
    therefore satisfied with having done his duty, and could safely
    leave them to the management of the proper parties, and recommend
    the police to do their duty. It appears that the gallant officer at
    the head of the police (Sir Charles Shaw), has too much discretion
    and good sense to be set on like a dog to worry out a society of
    Christians, because the editor of the Puseyite Oracle pointed
    the finger of scorn at them, because they dared to worship God
    according to the dictates of their own consciences. I should have
    liked very well for the police to have been there on Sunday last,
    for three persons had to be put out by the brethren for disturbing
    the meeting in the sacrament services.

    I remain, beloved brethren, your brother and fellow laborer,

    G. Walker.

    P. S.--I omitted to say that the writer in the paper alluded to,
    informed the public that he was endeavoring to obtain information
    respecting the movements of the people. He had previously sent a
    person to Elder Pratt to get him to state something in writing
    respecting emigration, and after the publication of the letter
    before referred to, he again sent to Elder Pratt for additional
    information in writing. I happened to be at Elder Pratt's when he
    made the second application, and I told Elder Pratt that he was the
    individual who had published the letter in the _Courier_. Elder
    Pratt sent him another letter containing the required information;
    and also stated that he had no objection to submit to him, or to
    the government of this country, or any of its departments, the
    religious principles of our society, our place of emigration, and
    indeed the whole of our movements in this and other countries, for
    the strictest investigation.

    The manufacturers are evidently beginning to be jealous of the
    mechanics and workmen emigrating with people having so systematic
    an organization as the Latter-day Saints display in their
    arrangements in this town.

    I remain yours, &c. G. W.

Footnotes:

1. Peter Maughan was born May 7, 1811, at Breckenridge, in the parish
of Parley, county of Cumberland, England. He married Miss Ruth Harrison
in 1829. He was baptized into the Church by Elder Isaac Russell
in 1838, and emigrated to Nauvoo with his family of six children,
now motherless, his wife having died in 1841. He came on the ship
_Rochester_, in company with Brigham Young and several other members
of the quorum of the Twelve on their return home. He was a man of keen
intelligence and commanding personal influence.

2. Cabul is the capital of Afghanistan, situated on the river Kabul.
It is noted as a commercial and strategic center, and the event named
in the text above is an incident in what is usually called the first
Afghan War. While the British were compelled to evacuate the place, as
stated in the text, they re-took it in September following.

3. Widow of the late Don Carlos Smith, the Prophet's brother.

4. The article from the _Star_ here referred to is inserted _in
extenso_, and that for the reason that so many letters of Elder Hyde's
concerning his journey to Jerusalem have already appeared in this
volume, that this one seems necessary to the completion of the history
of that mission, which must be regarded as an important movement on the
part of the Church at this period.

5. George W. Gee was the first son of Solomon and Sarah W. Gee, born
in Rome, Ashtabula county, Ohio, August 13, 1815. Was baptized at
Kirtland, Geauga county, Ohio, February 17, 1833. Married Mary Jane
Smith in Kirtland, February 5, 1838, by whom he had two sons named
Elias S. and George W. Went to Caldwell county, Missouri, 1838. Was
driven out by a mob in the spring of 1839. Went to Nauvoo, and was
ordained an Elder in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,
at the first conference held at Nauvoo, in October, 1839. Removed to
Ambrosa, Lee county, Iowa, where he was appointed postmaster and deputy
county surveyor; he surveyed the city plats of Nashville and Zarahemla,
under the direction of President Joseph Smith. Was sent by the fall
conference in 1841, to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where he died, January
20, 1842, while in discharge of his duties, having won the affections
of all the Saints with whom he had become acquainted, by his integrity
and perseverance. His opportunity for schooling had been limited,
but by his own exertion he attained to an excellent education, and
collected quite a respectable library.

6. "Chartism" and the "Chartists," may be said to have come into
existence early in the reign of Queen Victoria, in consequence of the
formal declarations of the leaders of the Liberal party in parliament
not to proceed further in the reforms to which it was generally
understood they were pledged. "Quietly studied now," says Justin
McCarthy (1878) "the people's charter does not seem a very formidable
document. There is so little smell of gun-powder about it. Its 'points'
as they were called were six:" Manhood suffrage; annual parliaments;
vote by ballot; abolition of the "property qualification" for
members of parliament; payment of the members of parliament; and the
division of the country into equal electoral districts. "There's your
charter," said Daniel O'Connel, to the secretary of the Workingmen's
Association--"There's your charter, agitate for it, and never be
content with anything less." It was this circumstance that gave the
movement and to its supporters the same "chartism" and "chartists."
"Nothing," to again quote McCarthy, "can be more unjust than to
represent the leaders and promoters of the movement as mere factions
and self-seeking demagogues. Some of them were impassioned young poets
drawn from the class whom Kingsley has described in 'Alton Locke;' some
were men of education; many were earnest and devoted fanatics; and so
far as we can judge, all, or nearly all, were sincere." _History of Our
Own Times_, Vol. I, Chapter V. This to show that the preaching of the
Elders of the Church to the "Chartists," was no effort to unite Church
work with any wild and disorderly political movement in England.

{510}



CHAPTER XXX.

Emigration of the Saints from England to Nauvoo--The Book of Abraham.

_Sunday, January 30, 1842_.--I preached at my house morning and
evening, concerning the different spirits, their operations, designs,
&c.

_Monday, 31_.--Assisted in appraising the tithings of Saturday with
Emma. Received many calls. Read in the Book of Mormon. After dinner
visited Brother Chase who was very sick, and in the evening was in
council with Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, Wilford
Woodruff, and Willard Richards concerning Brother Snyder and the
printing office; spent the evening very cheerfully, and retired about
ten o'clock.

_Tuesday, February 1_.--Two large stones, for door sills, for the
Nauvoo House, were landed.

The following article is from the _Millennial Star_ of this date:

    Emigration.

    In the midst of the general distress which prevails in this
    country on account of the want of employment, the high price of
    provisions, the oppression, priestcraft, and iniquity of the
    land, it is pleasing to the household of faith to contemplate a
    country reserved by the Almighty as a sure asylum for the poor
    and oppressed,--a country every way adapted to their wants and
    conditions--and still more pleasing to think that thousands of the
    Saints have already made their escape from this country, and all
    its abuses and distress, and that they have found a home, where, by
    persevering industry, they may enjoy all the blessings of liberty,
    peace and plenty.

    It is not yet two years since the Saints in England, in obedience
    to the command of their heavenly Father, commenced a general plan
    of emigration to the land of Zion.

    They were few in number, generally poor, and had every opposition
    {511} to encounter, both from a want of means and from the enemies
    of truth, who circulated every falsehood calculated to hinder or
    discourage them. Newspapers and tracts were put in circulation,
    sermons and public speeches were delivered in abundance, to warn
    the people that Nauvoo was a barren waste on the sea shore--that
    it was a wild and uninhabited swamp--that it was full of savages,
    wild beasts and serpents--that all the English Saints who should
    go there would be immediately sold for slaves by the leaders of
    the Church--that there was nothing to eat, no water, and no way
    possible to obtain a living; that all who went there would have
    their money taken from them, and themselves imprisoned, &c. But
    notwithstanding all these things, thousands have emigrated from
    this country, and now find themselves comfortably situated, and in
    the enjoyment of the comforts of life, and in the midst of society
    where God is worshiped in the spirit of truth and union, and where
    nearly all are agreed in religious principles. They all find plenty
    of employment and good wages, while the expense of living is about
    one-eighth of what it costs in this country. For instance--beef and
    pork costs about one penny per pound, flour from 2s to 3s for forty
    pounds, and Indian meal about one shilling for sixty pounds; butter
    from 4d to 6d per pound, while milch cows are to be had in plenty
    for about 3 per head, and other things in proportion. Millions on
    millions of acres of land lie before them unoccupied, with a soil
    as rich as Eden, and a surface as smooth, clear, and ready for the
    plough as the park scenery of England.

    Instead of a lonely swamp or dense forest filled with savages, wild
    beasts and serpents, large cities and villages are springing up
    in their midst, with schools, colleges, and temples. The mingled
    noise of mechanism, the bustle of trade, the song of devotion, are
    heard in the distance, while thousands of flocks and herds are seen
    grazing peacefully on the plains, and the fields and gardens smile
    with plenty, and the wild red men of the forest are only seen as
    they come on a friendly visit to the Saints and to learn the way of
    the Lord.

    Several large ships have been chartered by the Saints during the
    present fall and winter, and have been filled with emigrants, who
    have gone forth with songs of joy; and some of them have already
    arrived safely in the promised land, while others are, doubtless,
    still tossing upon the ocean.

    The expense of passage and provisions to New Orleans has, at no
    time this season, exceeded 4, and it is generally as low as three
    pounds fifteen shillings. This is remarkable when we reflect that
    each passenger has provisions and water provided in plenty for ten
    weeks. But it is obtained at this low price by a union of effort
    among the Saints, and by the faithful and persevering exertions
    of their agents. For instance {512} they purchase provisions by
    the quantity, and duty free, and the moment they bid farewell to
    their native shores they hoist the _Flag of Liberty_--the Ensign of
    Zion--the stars and stripes of the American Union; and under its
    protection they completely and practically nullify the bread tax.
    They eat free bread, free tea, free sugar, free everything, and
    thus accomplish a journey of five thousand miles on the same money
    that is would cost to feed them for the same length of time in
    England.

    Who that has a heart to feel, or a soul to rejoice, will not be
    glad at so glorious a plan of deliverance? Who will not hail the
    messengers of the Latter-day Saints as the friends of humanity--the
    benefactors of mankind.

  Thousands have gone, and millions more must go,
  The Gentiles as a stream to Zion flow.

    Yes, friends, this glorious work has but just commenced; and we
    now call upon the Saints to come forward with united effort, with
    persevering exertion, and with union of action, and help yourselves
    and one another to emigrate to the Land of Promise.

    In this way we shall not only bring about the deliverance of tens
    of thousands, who must otherwise suffer in this country, but we
    shall add to the strength of Zion, and help to rear her cities and
    temples--"to make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the
    garden of the Lord," while the young men and the middle aged will
    serve to increase her legions--to strengthen her bulwarks--that the
    enemies of law and order who have sought her destruction, may stand
    afar off and tremble, and her banner become terrible to the wicked.

    Ye children of Zion, once more we say, in the name of Israel's God,
    arise, break off your shackles, loose yourselves from the bands of
    your neck, and go forth to inherit the earth, and to build up waste
    places of many generations.

    All who would go before September next, should go in the early part
    of March, as it is as late as is advisable to venture by way of
    New Orleans, on account of the extreme heat of summer; and to go
    by New York or Quebec, will be double the expense. Experience has
    taught us that an emigrant can go from Liverpool to New Orleans,
    and from thence 1,500 miles up the river to Nauvoo for something
    like 5 per head, including all provisions and expenses; while by
    way of New York or Quebec it will cost from ten to thirteen pounds;
    and besides there is another consideration, and that is, goods will
    cost but a trifle for freight up the Mississippi on a steamer,
    while the expense would be immense the other way.

    Therefore the Saints will please take notice, that after the 10th
    of March next, emigration had better entirely cease, till about the
    20th of {513} September following. If thousands should wish to go
    between this time and the 10th of March, they have only to furnish
    us with their names and about 4 per head (children under fourteen
    years half price), and we will provide them passage and provisions,
    for the voyage, and return the overplus, if any, at Liverpool.

    We would again urge upon emigrants the important fact that if
    they make known to us their intentions, and send their money and
    names some weeks beforehand, it will be a great convenience, and
    save confusion, trouble and expense. All applications should
    be addressed to Messrs. Pratt and Fielding, 36 Chapel street,
    Liverpool, or to the _Star_ office, 47 Oxford street, Manchester.

    We do not wish to confine the benefit of our emigration plan to
    the Saints, but are willing to grant all industrious, honest, and
    well-disposed persons who may apply to us the same information and
    assistance as emigrants to the western states, there being abundant
    room for more than a hundred millions of inhabitants.

[Sidenote: Death of Laura Phelps.]

_Wednesday, 2_.--Sister Laura Phelps, wife of Morris Phelps, died,
aged 36 years. She was driven from Jackson county in 1833, was in the
persecution of Missouri, in 1838, and went from Iowa to Missouri to
assist in liberating her husband, and was left in the prison yard when
he made his escape, willing to suffer all the abuses a savage horde
could inflict upon her to set her companion free from the grasp of his
murderous enemies. Her rest is glorious.

I spent the day in council with Dr. Isaac Galland and Calvin A. Warren,
Esq.

_Thursday, 3_.--In council with Calvin A. Warren, Esq., concerning a
settlement with the estate of Oliver Granger, and delivered him the
necessary papers.

Elder Woodruff took the superintendence of the printing office, and
Elder Taylor the editorial department of the _Times and Seasons_; and
he commenced by taking an inventory of the establishment this day.

_Friday, 4_.--Instructed that an invoice of Dr. Galland's scrip be made.

[Sidenote: Debates in Nauvoo.]

Closed a contract with Ebenezer Robinson for the printing office on
the corner of Bain and Water streets, also {514} the paper fixtures,
bookbindery, and stereotype foundry, by proxy, namely, Willard
Richards, cost between 7,000 and 8,000 dollars. In the evening attended
a debate. At this time debates were held weekly, and entered into by
men of the first talents in the city, young and old, for the purpose of
eliciting truth, acquiring knowledge, and improving in public speaking.

[Sidenote: Vindication of Daniel Wood.]

_Saturday, 5_.--Elder Daniel Wood, who had been silenced by Presidents
Smith and Young, on a complaint for teaching false doctrine, came
before the High Council at Nauvoo, and proved that he had not taught
false doctrine, but had been complained of by those who had prejudice
and hardness against him, and was restored to his former standing in
the Church.

This being Tithing Day, upwards of $1,000 worth of property was
received.

The ship _Hope_ sailed from Liverpool for New Orleans with 270 Saints.

_Sunday, 6_.--Elders Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball went to La
Harpe to hold a two-days meeting.

From this time I was engaged in counseling the brethren and attending
to the common vocations of life and my calling, reading the Book of
Mormon, &c.

_Thursday, 10_.--I was sick and kept my bed.

The war continues to rage between England and China.

_Friday, 11_.--I was convalescent, and walked twice to the store.

_Saturday, 12_.--An ordinance regulating weights and measures was
passed, also an ordinance regulating auctions, by the city council
which I attended. During the sitting of the council the subject of our
chartered rights was discussed.

In the afternoon, plead in an action of slander before the mayor, in
behalf of the city against Lyman O. {515} Littlefield, and obtained
judgment of $500 bonds to keep the peace.

_Sunday, 13_--In council with the mayor, Brother Hyrum and Elder
Willard Richards, and visited Samuel Bennett (who was sick) in company
with William Law and wife.

_Monday, 14_.--Spent the day at my office, transacting a variety of
business, and continued to do the same from day to day till the 17th.

_Thursday, 17_.--I attended a special session of the city council, when
an ordinance was passed authorizing and regulating marriages in the
city of Nauvoo.

    _Letter of Alfred Cordon to Joseph Smith--Reporting Affairs in
    England_.

    Hanley, Stafford County, England, February 17, 1842.

    President Joseph Smith:--The work in which we are engaged rolls
    on in this lands and in spite of all its enemies, moves onward
    in majesty and power; there are many who devote all their time
    and talent in endeavoring to overthrow it; but I discover that
    they can "do nothing against the truth but for the truth." Many
    tracts have been published against us, containing all manner of
    lies, but in the end good will be the result. "He that knoweth
    God, heareth us." Some of the tools of Satan are doing more in
    spreading the truth than we are able to do; one in particular, a
    Mr. Brindley, is publishing a periodical showing the "errors and
    blasphemies" of "Mormonism;" and in order to do this, he publishes
    many of the revelations of God given to us, and through this means,
    the testimony is visiting the mansions of the high and mighty
    ones--the "reverends, right reverends" and all the noble champions
    of sectarians receive them as a precious morsel; and they are
    read with much interest; whereas, if we had sent them, they would
    have been spurned from their dwellings, and would not have been
    considered worth reading.

    The state of this country is very awful, and is, according to
    prospects, on the eve of a mighty revolution; all confidence is
    gone between master and man, and men are afraid of each other;
    peace is fast removing from this land; in the course of the last
    few days, in many parts of this isle, they have been burning
    the effigy of the great men of this nation--poverty, distress
    and starvation abound on every hand. The groans, and tears and
    wretchedness of the thousands of people are enough to rend the
    hearts of demons; many of the Saints are suffering much {516}
    through hunger and nakedness; many with large families can scarcely
    get bread and water enough to hold the spirit in the tabernacle;
    many, very many, are out of employment, and cannot get work to do,
    and others that do work hard fourteen or fifteen hours per day, can
    scarcely earn enough to enable them to live upon the earth. Surely
    there is need of deliverance in Zion, and I am ready to exclaim,
    thanks be to Thy name, O Lord, for remembering Thy covenants! and
    that the "set time to favor Zion has come," and that He has chosen
    the west for a refuge for His people.

    Wishing you all success, I remain, yours in the new and everlasting
    covenant.

    Alfred Cordon.

[Sidenote: Confidence in the Nauvoo Charter.]

_Friday, 18_.--I attended an adjourned city council, and spoke at
considerable length in committee of the whole on the great privileges
of the Nauvoo Charter, and especially on the registry of deeds for
Nauvoo, and prophesied in the name of the Lord God, that Judge Douglas
and no other judge of the Circuit Court will ever set aside a law of
the city council, establishing a registry of deeds in the city of
Nauvoo.

_Saturday, 19_.--I was engaged in the Recorder's Office (in the first
story of the Brick Store), on the tithings, and in council in my office
with Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and others.

A severe shock of an earthquake threw down all the parapets, bastions,
and guard houses constructed by Sir Robert Sale, and demolished a third
part of the town of Jellalabad, India.

_Sunday, 20_.--I attended the meeting on the hill. About this time the
ship _John Cummins_ sailed from Liverpool for New Orleans with Saints.
The _Tremont_ sailed on the 12th of January with 143 passengers, mostly
Saints. The expenses of passage from Liverpool to New Orleans averages
from 3, 15s to 4, including provisions.

_Monday, 21_.--I was visiting in the city in the morning, and
transacting a variety of business at the office in the afternoon and
evening.

    {517} _Announcement of the Trustee in Trust for the Church
    Respecting Work on the Temple_.

    To The Brethren In Nauvoo City: Greeting--It is highly important
    for the forwarding of the Temple, that an equal distribution of
    labor should be made in relation to time; as a superabundance of
    hands one week, and none the next, tends to retard the progress of
    the work: therefore every brother is requested to be particular
    to labor on the day set apart for the same, in his ward; and to
    remember that he that sows sparingly, shall also reap sparingly, so
    that if the brethren want a plentiful harvest, they will do well to
    be at the place of labor in good season in the morning, bringing
    all necessary tools, according to their occupation, and those who
    have teams bring them also, unless otherwise advised by the Temple
    Committee. Should any one be detained from his labor by unavoidable
    circumstances on the day appointed, let him labor the next day, or
    the first day possible.

    N. B--The captains of the respective wards are particularly
    requested to be at the place of labor on their respective days,
    and keep an accurate account of each man's work, and be ready to
    exhibit a list of the same when called for.

    The heart of the Trustee is daily made to rejoice in the good
    feelings of the brethren, made manifest in their exertion to carry
    forward the work of the Lord, and rear His Temple; and it is hoped
    that neither planting, sowing, or reaping will hereafter be made to
    interfere with the regulations hinted at above.

    Joseph Smith, Trustee in Trust.

    _An Additional Word from the Twelve_.

    Recorders Office Febr. 21, 1842.

    We would also say to all the churches, that inasmuch as they want
    the blessings of God and angels, as also of the Church of Jesus
    Christ, and wish to see it spread and prosper through the world,
    and Zion built up and truth and righteousness prevail,--let all
    the different branches of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
    Saints in all the world, call meetings in their respective places
    and tithe themselves and send up to this place to the Trustee in
    Trust, so that his hands may be loosed, and the Temple go on, and
    other works be done, such as the new translation of the Bible, and
    the record of Father Abraham published to the world.

    Beloved brethren, we as the messengers of the Lord feel to call
    upon you to help roll on the mighty work, it is our duty so to do,
    and it is your reasonable service--and the Lord will bless you in
    so doing.

    {518} We subscribe ourselves your humble servants, and standard
    bearers to the world. Brigham Young, President,

    Willard Richards, Clerk of the Twelve.

_Tuesday, 22_.--Attended to a variety of business as usual.

_Wednesday, 23_.--Settled with and paid Brother Chase, and assisted
in the counting room in settling with Ebenezer Robinson, visiting the
printing office, and gave Reuben Hedlock instruction concerning the cut
for the altar and gods in the Records of Abraham, as designed for the
_Times and Seasons_.

_Thursday, 24_.--Engaged in council with the brethren, attended to
business at the general office. In the afternoon explained the records
of Abraham to the recorder. Sisters Marinda, Mary, and others present
to hear the explanations.

    _Letter of the Prophet's to an Unknown Brother on Tithing_.

    Nauvoo, Feb. 24, 1842.

    Beloved Brother--Yours of the 24th ult. is received, in relation
    to certain tithings of your neighborhood being transferred to your
    account, which you hold against the Church to the amount of $305,
    including $150 of your own.

    There are no receipts issued for property received on tithing; but
    an entry is made in the Book of the Law of the Lord, and parties
    living at a distance notified of the same.

    If the parties named will pay you the sum specified in your letter,
    and you will endorse the same, i. e. $305, on the obligation you
    hold against the Church, and give me notice accordingly, with a
    schedule of individuals' names and payments, the same shall be
    entered to their credit on tithing. Yours, &c.

    Joseph Smith,

    Willard Richards, Scribe.

_Friday, 25_.--Engaged in counseling and general business.

_Saturday, 26_.--At the recorder's office engaged in the tithing, and
at the court at the office of the Patriarch.

_Sunday, 27_.--Engaged in counseling the Saints.

_Monday, 28_.--I offered a settlement to Father Snow by {519} Jenkins'
notes, which he declined, choosing to take land in Ramus; paid Brother
Robert Pierce $2,700, the balance due him for a farm Dr. Galland bought
of Brother Pierce in Brandywine Township, Chester county, Pennsylvania,
for $5,000, namely a deed for lot 2, block 94, $1,100, and lot 1,
block 95, $800, and lot 4, block 78, $806, the remainder having been
previously paid. The bond was cancelled and given up, and Brother
Pierce expressed his satisfaction of the whole, in the _Times and
Seasons_, as follows--

    _Note of Robert Pierce--Expressing Satisfaction at Financial
    Settlement_.

    Nauvoo, Feb. 28, 1842.

    _President Joseph Smith_.

    Dear Sir--I feel anxious to express my feelings concerning the
    business transactions between the Church and myself; as it is well
    known to many, that Dr. Galland, as agent for the Church, purchased
    my farm while I was living in Brandywine Township, Chester county,
    Pennsylvania, and many supposed, or pretended to suppose, I would
    get nothing in return; but I wish to say to all my old friends
    and enemies in Pennsylvania, through the medium of the _Times and
    Seasons_, that I have received my pay in full from the Church of
    Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, through yourself, sir, as their
    trustee in trust, according to the original contract; and that from
    my acquaintance with yourself, and those brethren who are assisting
    you in the great and increasing business of the Church, I have the
    fullest confidence in all the transactions of the Church, and I
    request those papers in Philadelphia, who published concerning my
    sale and loss, with such bitter lamentations, to publish this also.

    I am, sir, your brother and well-wisher,

    Robert Pierce.

_Thursday, March 1, 1842_.--During the forenoon I was at my office and
the printing office, correcting the first plate or cut of the records
of Father Abraham, prepared by Reuben Hedlock, for the _Times and
Seasons_, and in council in my office, in the afternoon; and in the
evening with the Twelve and their wives at Elder Woodruff's, at which
time I explained many important principles in relation to progressive
improvement in the scale of intelligent existence.

{520} I commenced publishing my translations of the Book of Abraham in
the _Times and Seasons_ as follows--

Fac-Simile From the Book of Abraham--No. 1.

Explanation of the Above Cut.

Fig. 1. The Angel of the Lord.

Fig. 2. Abraham fastened upon an altar.

Fig. 3. The idolatrous priest of Elkenah attempting to offer up Abraham
as a sacrifice.

Fig. 4. The altar for sacrifice by the idolatrous priests, standing
before the gods of Elkenah, Libnah, Mahmackrah, Korash, and Pharaoh.

Fig. 5. The idolatrous god of Elkenah.

Fig. 6. The idolatrous god of Libnah.

Fig. 7. The idolatrous god of Mahmackrah.

Fig. 8. The idolatrous god of Korash.

Fig. 9. The idolatrous god of Pharaoh.

Fig. 10. Abraham in Egypt.

Fig. 11. Designed to represent the pillars of heaven, as understood by
the Egyptians.

Fig. 12. Raukeeyang, signifying expanse, or the firmament over our
heads; but in this case, in relation to this subject, the Egyptians
meant it to signify Shaumau, to be high, or the heavens; answering to
the Hebrew word, Shaumahyeem.

{521}

Fac-Simile From the Book of Abraham--No. 2.

Explanation of the Above Cut.

Fig. 1. Kolob, signifying the first creation, nearest to the celestial,
or the residence of God. First in government, the last pertaining to
the measurement of time. The measurement according to celestial time;
which celestial time signifies one day to a cubit. One day in Kolob is
equal to a thousand years according to the measurement of this earth,
which is called by the Egyptians Jah-oh-eh.

Fig. 2. Stands next to Kolob, called by the Egyptians Oliblish, which
is the next grand governing creation near to the celestial or the place
where God resides; holding the key of power also, pertaining to other
planets; as revealed from God to Abraham, as he offered sacrifice upon
an altar, which he had built unto the Lord.

Fig. 3. Is made to represent God, sitting upon His throne, clothed
with power and authority; with a crown of eternal light upon his
head; representing, also, the grand key words of the Holy Priesthood,
as revealed to Adam in the Garden of Eden, as also to Seth, Noah,
Melchisedek, Abraham, and all to whom the Priesthood was revealed.

Fig. 4. Answers to the Hebrew word Raukeeyang, signifying expanse or
the firmament of the heavens; also a numerical figure, in Egyptian
signifying one thousand; answering to the measuring of the time of
Oliblish, which is equal with Kolob in its revolution and in its
measuring of time.

Fig. 5. Is called in Egyptian Enish-go-on-dosh; this is one of the
governing planets also, and is said by the Egyptians to be the
Sun, and to borrow its light {522} from Kolob, through the medium
of Kae-e-vanrash, which is the grand Key, or, in other words, the
governing power, which governs fifteen other fixed planets or stars,
as also Floeese or the Moon, the Earth and the Sun in their annual
revolutions. This planet receives its power through the medium of
Kli-flos-is-es, or Hah-ko-kau-beam, the stars represented by numbers
22, and 23, receiving light from the revolutions of Kolob.

Fig. 6. Represents this earth in its four quarters.

Fig. 7. Represents God sitting upon His throne, revealing through the
heavens the grand Key-words of the Priesthood; as also the sign of the
Holy Ghost unto Abraham, in the form of a dove.

Fig. 8. Contains writings that cannot be revealed unto the world; but
is to be had in the Holy Temple of God.

Fig. 9. Ought not to be revealed at the present time.

Fig. 10. Also.

Fig. 11. Also.--If the world can find out these numbers, so let it be.
Amen.

Figures 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, and 20, will be given in the
own due time of the Lord.

The above translation is given as far as we have any right to give at
the present time.

Explanation on Cut No. 3.

Fig. 1. Abraham sitting upon Pharaoh's throne, by the politeness of
the king, with a crown upon his head, representing the Priesthood, as
emblematical of the grand Presidency in Heaven, with the scepter of
justice and judgment in his hand.

Fig. 2. King Pharaoh, whose name is given in the characters above his
head.

Fig. 3. Signifies Abraham in Egypt; referring to Abraham, as given also
in the ninth number of the Times and Seasons. (Also as given in the
first fac-simile of this book.)

Fig. 4. Prince of Pharaoh, King of Egypt, as written above the hand.

Fig. 5. Shulem, one of the king's principal waiters, as represented by
the characters above his hand.

Fig. 6. Olimlah, a slave belonging to the prince.

Abraham is reasoning upon the principles of Astronomy, in the king's
court.

{523} Fac-Simile From The Book of Abraham--No 3.

{524}

The Book Of Abraham. [1]

Translated from the Papyrus, by Joseph Smith. [2]

    _A Translation of some Ancient Records that have fallen into our
    hands, from the Catacombs of Egypt, purporting to be the writings
    of Abraham, while he was in Egypt, called the Book of Abraham,
    written by his own hand upon papyrus_.

    In the land of the Chaldeans, at the residence of my father, I
    Abraham, saw that it was needful for me to obtain another place
    of residence, and finding there was greater happiness, and peace
    and rest for me, I sought for the blessings of the fathers, and
    the right whereunto I should be ordained to administer the same;
    having been myself a follower of righteousness, desiring also to
    be one who possessed great knowledge, and to be a greater follower
    of righteousness, and to possess a greater knowledge, and to be a
    father of many nations, a prince of peace; and desiring to receive
    instructions and to keep the commandments of God, I became a
    rightful heir, a High Priest, holding the right belonging to the
    fathers; it was conferred upon me from the fathers; it came down
    from the fathers, from the beginning of time, yea, even from the
    beginning, or before the foundations of the earth, to the present
    time, even the right of the first born, or the first man, who is
    Adam, our first Father, through the fathers, unto me.

    2. I sought for mine appointment unto the Priesthood according to
    the appointment of God unto the fathers, concerning the seed. My
    {525} fathers having turned from their righteousness, and from the
    holy commandments which the Lord their God had given unto them,
    unto the worshiping of the gods of the heathen, utterly refused to
    hearken to my voice; for their hearts were set to do evil, and were
    wholly turned to the god of Elkenah, and the god of Libnah, and the
    god of Mahmackrah, and the god of Korash, and the god of Pharaoh,
    king of Egypt, therefore they turned their hearts to the sacrifice
    of the heathen in offering up their children unto their dumb idols,
    and hearkened not unto my voice, but endeavored to take away my
    life by the hand of the priest of Elkenah--the priest of Elkenah
    was also the priest of Pharaoh.

    3. Now at this time it was the custom of the priest of Pharaoh,
    the king of Egypt, to offer up upon the altar which was built in
    the land of Chaldea, for the offering unto these strange gods,
    men, women and children. And it came to pass that the priest
    made an offering unto the god of Pharaoh, and also unto the god
    of Shagreel, even after the manner of the Egyptians. Now the god
    of Shagreel was the Sun. Even the thank-offering of a child did
    the priest of Pharaoh offer upon this altar, which stood by the
    hill called Potiphar's hill, at the head of the plain of Olishem.
    Now, this priest had offered upon the altar three virgins at one
    time, who were the daughters of Onitah, one of the royal descent,
    directly from the loins of Ham. These virgins were offered up
    because of their virtue; they would not bow down to worship gods of
    wood, or of stone, therefore they were killed upon this altar, and
    it was done after the manner of the Egyptians.

    4. And it came to pass that the priests laid violence upon me,
    that they might slay me also, as they did those virgins, upon this
    altar; and that you may have a knowledge of this altar, I will
    refer you to the representation at the commencement of this record.
    It was made after the form of a bedstead, such as was had among
    the Chaldeans, and it stood before the gods of Elkenah, Libna,
    Mahmackrah, Korash, and also a god like unto that of Pharaoh, king
    of Egypt. That you may have an understanding of these gods, I have
    given you the fashion of them in the figures at the beginning,
    which manner of the figures is called by the Chaldeans Rahleenos,
    which signifies hieroglyphics.

    5. And as they lifted up their hands upon me, that they might offer
    me up and take away my life, behold I lifted up my voice unto the
    Lord my God; and the Lord hearkened and heard, and he filled me
    with a vision of the Almighty, and the angel of his presence stood
    by me, and immediately unloosed my bands, and his voice was unto
    me, Abraham! Abraham! behold my name is JEHOVAH, and I have heard
    thee, and have come down to deliver thee, and to take thee away
    from thy father's house, and from all thy kinsfolk, into a strange
    land that thou knowest {526} not of, and this because they have
    turned their hearts away from me, to worship the god of Elkenah,
    and the god of Libnah, and the god of Mahmackrah, and the god of
    Korash, and the god of Pharaoh, king of Egypt; therefore I have
    come down to visit them, and to destroy him who hath lifted up his
    hand against thee, Abraham my son, to take away thy life. Behold I
    will lead thee by my hand, and I will take thee to put upon thee my
    name, even the Priesthood of thy father; and my power shall be over
    thee; as it was with Noah so shall it be with thee, but through thy
    ministry my name shall be known in the earth for ever, for I am thy
    God.

    6. Behold Potiphar's Hill was in the land of Ur, of Chaldea; and
    the Lord broke down the altar of Elkenah, and of the gods of the
    land, and utterly destroyed them, and smote the priest that he
    died; and there was great mourning in Chaldea, and also in the
    court of Pharaoh, which Pharaoh signifies king by royal blood.
    Now this king of Egypt was a descendant from the loins of Ham,
    and was a partaker of the blood of the Canaanites by birth. From
    this descent sprang all the Egyptians, and thus the blood of the
    Canaanites was preserved in the land.

    7. The land of Egypt being first discovered by a woman, who
    was the daughter of Ham, and the daughter of Egyptus, which,
    in the Chaldean, signifies Egypt, which signifies, that which
    is forbidden. When this woman discovered the land it was under
    water, who afterwards settled her sons in it: and thus from Ham,
    sprang that race which preserved the curse in the land. Now the
    first government of Egypt was established by Pharaoh, the eldest
    son of Egyptus, the daughter of Ham, and it was after the manner
    of the government of Ham, which was patriarchal. Pharaoh being a
    righteous man, established his kingdom and judged his people wisely
    and justly all his days, seeking earnestly to imitate that order
    established by the fathers in the first generations, in the days of
    the first patriarchal reign, even in the reign of Adam, and also of
    Noah, his father, who blessed him with the blessings of the earth,
    and with the blessings of wisdom, but cursed him as pertaining to
    the Priesthood.

    8. Now Pharaoh being of that lineage by which he could not have
    the right of Priesthood, notwithstanding the Pharaohs would fain
    claim it from Noah, through Ham, therefore my father was led away
    by their idolatry; but I shall endeavor hereafter to delineate
    the chronology, running back from myself to the beginning of the
    creation, for the records have come into my hands which I hold unto
    this present time.

    9. Now, after the priest of Elkenah was smitten, that he died,
    there came a fulfillment of those things which were said unto me
    concerning the land of Chaldea, that there should be a famine in
    the land. Accordingly a famine prevailed throughout all the land of
    Chaldea, and my {527} father was sorely tormented because of the
    famine, and he repented of the evil which he had determined against
    me, to take away my life. But the records of the fathers, even the
    patriarchs, concerning the right of Priesthood, the Lord my God
    preserved in mine own hands, therefore a knowledge of the beginning
    of the creation, and also of the planets, and of the stars, as
    they were made known unto the fathers, have I kept even unto this
    day, and I shall endeavor to write some of these things upon this
    record, for the benefit of my posterity that shall come after me.

    10. Now, the Lord God caused the famine to wax sore in the land of
    Ur, insomuch that Haran, my brother died, but Terah, my father,
    yet lived in the land of Ur of the Chaldees. And it came to pass
    that I, Abraham, took Sarai to wife, and Nehor, my brother, took
    Milcah to wife, who were the daughters of Haran. Now the Lord said
    unto me, Abraham, get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred
    and from thy father's house unto a land that I will show thee.
    Therefore I left the land of Ur, of the Chaldees, to go into the
    land of Canaan; and I took Lot, my brother's son, and his wife, and
    Sarai, my wife, and also my father followed after me, unto the land
    which we denominated Haran. And the famine abated; and my father
    tarried in Haran and dwelt there, as there were many flocks in
    Haran; and my father turned again unto his idolatry, therefore he
    continued in Haran.

    11. But I, Abraham, and Lot, my brother's son, prayed unto the
    Lord, and the Lord appeared unto me, and said unto me, arise, and
    take Lot with thee, for I have purposed to take thee away out of
    Haran, and to make of thee a minister, to bear my name in a strange
    land which I will give unto thy seed after thee for an everlasting
    possession, when they hearken to my voice, for I am the Lord thy
    God; I dwell in heaven, the earth is my footstool; I stretch my
    hand over the sea, and it obeys my voice; I cause the wind and the
    fire to be my chariot; I say to the mountains depart hence, and
    behold they are taken away by a whirlwind, in an instant, suddenly.
    My name is Jehovah, and I know the end from the beginning,
    therefore, my hand shall be over thee, and I will make of thee a
    great nation, and I will bless thee above measure; and make thy
    name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy
    seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry
    and Priesthood unto all nations; and I will bless them through thy
    name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after
    thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and
    bless thee, as their father, and I will bless them that bless
    thee, and curse them that curse thee, and in thee (that is, in thy
    Priesthood), and in thy seed (that is thy Priesthood), for I give
    unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in
    thy seed after thee (that is to say, the {528} literal seed, or the
    seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed,
    even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of
    salvation, even of life eternal.

    12. Now, after the Lord had withdrawn from speaking to me, and
    withdrawn his face from me, I said in my heart, thy servant has
    sought thee earnestly, now I have found thee. Thou didst send thine
    angel to deliver me from the gods of Elkenah, and I will do well
    to hearken unto thy voice, therefore let thy servant rise up and
    depart in peace. So I, Abraham, departed as the Lord had said unto
    me, and Lot with me, and I, Abraham, was sixty and two years old
    when I departed out of Haran. And I took Sarai, whom I took to
    wife when I was in Ur in Chaldea, and Lot, my brother's son, and
    all our substance that we had gathered, and the souls that we had
    won in Haran, and came forth in the way to the land of Canaan, and
    dwelt in tents, as we came on our way; therefore, eternity was our
    covering, and our rock, and our salvation, as we journeyed from
    Haran by the way of Jershon, to come to the land of Canaan.

    13. Now I, Abraham, built an altar in the land of Jershon, and
    made an offering unto the Lord, and prayed that the famine might
    be turned away from my father's house, that they might not perish;
    and then we passed from Jershon through the land, unto the place
    of Sechem. It was situated in the plains of Moreh, and we had
    already come into the borders of the land of the Canaanites, and I
    offered sacrifice there in the plains of Moreh, and called on the
    Lord devoutly, because we had already come into the land of this
    idolatrous nation.

    14. And the Lord appeared unto me in answer to my prayers, and
    said unto me, unto thy seed will I give this land. And I, Abraham
    arose from the place of the altar which I had built unto the Lord,
    and removed from thence unto a mountain on the east of Bethel, and
    pitched my tent there; Bethel on the west, and Hai on the east; and
    there I built another altar unto the Lord, and called again upon
    the name of the Lord.

    15. And I, Abraham, journeyed, going on still towards the south;
    and there was a continuation of a famine in the land, and I,
    Abraham, concluded to go down into Egypt, to sojourn there, for the
    famine became very grievous. And it came to pass when I was come
    near to enter into Egypt, the Lord said unto me, behold Sarai, thy
    wife, is a very fair woman to look upon, therefore it shall come
    to pass, when the Egyptians shall see her they will say, she is
    his wife; and they will kill you, but they will save her alive:
    therefore, see that ye do on this wise, let her say unto the
    Egyptians she is thy sister, and thy soul shall live. And it came
    to pass that I, Abraham, told Sarai, my wife, all that the Lord had
    said unto me; therefore, say unto them, I pray thee, thou art {529}
    my sister, that it may be well with me for thy sake, and my soul
    shall live because of thee.

    16. And I, Abraham, had the Urim and Thummim, which the Lord my
    God had given unto me, in Ur of the Chaldees; and I saw the stars,
    that they were very great, and that one of them was nearest unto
    the throne of God: and there were many great ones which were near
    unto it: and the Lord said unto me, these are the governing ones;
    and the name of the great one is Kolob, because it is near unto me;
    for I am the Lord thy God. I have set this one to govern all those
    which belong to the same order as that upon which thou standest.
    And the Lord said unto me, by the Urim and Thummim, that Kolob was
    after the manner of the Lord, according to its times and seasons
    in the revolutions thereof, that one revolution was a day unto the
    Lord, after His manner of reckoning, it being one thousand years
    according to the time appointed unto that whereon thou standest;
    this is the reckoning of the Lord's time, according to the
    reckoning of Kolob.

    17. And the Lord said unto me, the planet which is the lesser
    light, lesser than that which is to rule the day, even the night,
    is above, or greater than that upon which thou standest in point
    of reckoning, for it moveth in order more slow; this is in order,
    because it standeth above the earth upon which thou standest,
    therefore the reckoning of its time is not so many as to its number
    of days, and of months and of years. And the Lord said unto me, Now
    Abraham, these two facts exist, behold thine eyes see it; it is
    given unto thee to know the times of reckoning, and the set time,
    yea, the set time of the earth upon which thou standest, and the
    set time of the greater light, which is set to rule the day, and
    the set time of the lesser light, which is set to rule the night.

    18. Now the set time of the lesser light, is a longer time as to
    its reckoning than the reckoning of the time of the earth upon
    which thou standest; and where these two facts exist, there shall
    be another fact above them; that is, there shall be another planet
    whose reckoning of time shall be longer still; and thus there shall
    be the reckoning of the time of one planet above another, until
    thou come nigh unto Kolob, which Kolob is after the reckoning of
    the Lord's time; which Kolob is set nigh unto the throne of God,
    to govern all those planets which belong to the same order as that
    upon which thou standest. And it is given unto thee to know the set
    time of all the stars, that are set to give light, until thou come
    near unto the throne of God.

    19. Thus I, Abraham, talked with the Lord face to face, as one man
    talketh with another; and He told me of the works which His hands
    had made; and He said unto me, My son, my son, (and His hand was
    stretched out,) behold, I will show you all these. And He put His
    hand upon mine eyes, and I saw those things which His hands had
    made, {530} which were many; and they multiplied before mine eyes,
    and I could not see the end thereof; and He said unto me this is
    Shinehah which is the sun. And He said unto me, Kokob, which is
    star. And He said unto me, Olea, which is the moon. And He said
    unto me, Kokaubeam, which signifies stars, or all the great lights
    which were in the firmament of heaven. And it was in the night time
    when the Lord spake these words unto me: I will multiply thee and
    thy seed after thee, like unto these; and if thou canst count the
    number of sands so shall be the number of thy seeds.

    20. And the Lord said unto me, Abraham, I show these things unto
    thee, before ye go into Egypt, that ye may declare all these words.
    If two things exist, and there be one above the other, there shall
    be greater things above them; therefore Kolob is the greatest of
    all the Kokaubeam that thou hast seen, because it is nearest unto
    me; now if there be two things, one above the other, and the moon
    be above the earth, then it may be that a planet, or a star may
    exist above it, (and there is nothing that the Lord thy God shall
    take in His heart to do, but what He will do it;) howbeit that He
    made the greater star; as, also, if there be two spirits, and one
    shall be more intelligent than the other, yet these two spirits,
    notwithstanding one is more intelligent than the other, have no
    beginning, they existed before; they shall have no end, they shall
    exist after, for they are gnolaum or eternal.

    21. And the Lord said unto me, these two facts do exist, that there
    are two spirits, one being more intelligent than the other, there
    shall be another more intelligent than they: I am the Lord thy God,
    I am more intelligent than they all. The Lord thy God sent His
    angel to deliver thee from the hands of the priest of Elkenah. I
    dwell in the midst of them all; I, now, therefore, have come down
    unto thee, to deliver unto thee the works which my hands have made,
    wherein my wisdom excelleth them all, for I rule in the heavens
    above, and in the earth beneath, in all wisdom and prudence, over
    all the intelligences thine eyes have seen from the beginning; I
    came down in the beginning in the midst of all the intelligences
    thou hast seen.

    22. Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that
    were organized before the world was; and among all these there were
    many of the noble and great ones, and God saw these souls that they
    were good, and He stood in the midst of them, and He said, These I
    will make my rulers; for He stood among those that were spirits,
    and he saw that they were good; and He said unto me, Abraham, thou
    art one of them, thou wast chosen before thou wast born. And there
    stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those
    who were with Him, We will go down, for there is space there, and
    we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon
    these may {531} dwell; and we will prove them herewith, to see if
    they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command
    them; and they who keep their first estate, shall be added upon;
    and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in
    the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they
    who keep their second estate, shall have glory added upon their
    heads for ever and ever.

    23. And the Lord said: Whom shall I send? And one answered like
    unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me and another answered and
    said: Here am I, send me. And the Lord said: I will send the first.
    And the second was angry, and kept not his first estate, and at
    that day many followed after him. And then the Lord said: Let us
    go down; and they went down at the beginning, and they (that is,
    the Gods), organized and formed the heavens and the earth. And the
    earth, after it was formed, was empty and desolate; because they
    had not formed anything but the earth; and darkness reigned upon
    the face of the deep, and the Spirit of the Gods was brooding upon
    the face of the waters.

    24. And they (the Gods), said; Let there be light, and there was
    light. And they, the Gods, comprehended the light for it was
    bright; and they divided the light, or caused it to be divided from
    the darkness, and the Gods called the light day, and the darkness
    they called night. And it came to pass that from the evening until
    morning they called night; and from the morning until the evening
    they called day; and this was the first, or the beginning of that
    which they called day and night.

    25. And the Gods also said: Let there be an expanse in the midst of
    the waters and it shall divide the waters from the waters. And the
    Gods ordered the expanse, so that it divided the waters which were
    under the expanse, from the waters which were above the expanse,
    and it was so, even as they ordered. And the Gods called the
    expanse heaven. And it came to pass that it was from evening until
    morning that they called night; and it came to pass that it was
    from morning until evening that they called day; and this was the
    second time that they called night and day.

    26. And the Gods ordered, saying: Let the waters under the heaven
    be gathered together unto one place, and let the earth come up dry,
    and it was so, as they ordered; and the Gods pronounced the dry
    land earth and the gathering together of the waters, pronounced
    they great waters: and the Gods saw that they were obeyed. And the
    Gods said: Let us prepare the earth to bring forth grass; the herb
    yielding seed; the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose
    seed in itself yieldeth its own likeness upon the earth; and it
    was so, even as they ordered. And the Gods organized the earth to
    bring forth grass from its own seed, and the herb to bring forth
    herb from its own seed, yielding seed {532} after his kind, and the
    earth to bring forth the tree from its own seed, yielding fruit,
    whose seed could only bring forth the same, in itself after his
    kind; and the Gods saw that they were obeyed. And it came to pass
    that they numbered the days: from the evening until the morning
    they called night. And it came to pass from the morning until the
    evening they called day; and it was the third time.

    27. And the Gods organized the lights in the expanse of the
    heavens, and caused them to divide the day from the night; and
    organized them to be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and
    for years and organized them to be for lights in the expanse of the
    heaven, to give light upon the earth; and it was so. And the Gods
    organized the two great lights, the greater light to rule the day,
    and the lesser light to rule the night, with the lesser light they
    set the stars, also; and the Gods set them in the expanse of the
    heavens, to give light upon the earth, and to rule over the day and
    over the night, and to cause to divide the light from the darkness.
    And the Gods watched those things which they had ordered, until
    they obeyed. And it came to pass that it was from evening until
    morning that it was night; and it came to pass that it was from
    morning until evening that it was day; and it was the fourth time.

    28. And the Gods said, Let us prepare the waters to bring forth
    abundantly the moving creatures that have life; and the fowl that
    they may fly above the earth, in the open expanse of heaven, And
    the Gods prepared the waters that they might bring forth great
    whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters
    were to bring forth abundantly after their kind; and every winged
    fowl after their kind; and the Gods saw that they would be obeyed,
    and that their plan was good. And the Gods said, We will bless them
    and cause them to be fruitful and multiply, and fill the waters in
    the seas, or great waters; and cause the fowl to multiply in the
    earth. And it came to pass that it was from evening until morning
    that they called night; and it came to pass that it was from
    morning until evening that they called day; and it was the fifth
    time.

    29. And the Gods prepared the earth to bring forth the living
    creature after his kind, cattle, and creeping things, and beasts
    of the earth after their kind; and it was so as they had said. And
    the Gods organized the earth to bring forth the beasts after their
    kind, and cattle after their kind, and everything that creepeth
    upon the earth after its kind; and the Gods saw they would obey.
    And the Gods took counsel among themselves, and said: Let us go
    down, and form man in our image, after our likeness, and we will
    give them dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of
    the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over
    every creeping thing, that creepeth upon the earth. So the Gods
    went down {533} to organize man in their own image, in the image
    of the Gods, to form they him male and female, to form they them;
    and the Gods said We will bless them. And the Gods said, We will
    cause them to be fruitful, and multiply and replenish the earth,
    and subdue it, and to have dominion over the fish of the sea, and
    over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth
    upon the earth. And the Gods said, Behold, we will give them every
    herb bearing seed that shall come upon the face of all the earth,
    and every tree which shall have fruit upon it, yea the fruit of
    the tree, yielding seed to them we will give it, it shall be for
    their meat; and to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of
    the air, and to everything that creepeth upon the earth, behold we
    will give them life, and also we will give to them every green herb
    for meat, and all these things shall be thus organized. And the
    Gods said, We will do everything that we have said, and organize
    them; and behold, they shall be very obedient. And it came to pass
    that it was from evening until morning that they called night; and
    it came to pass that it was from morning until evening that they
    called day, and they numbered the sixth time.

    30. And thus we will finish the heavens and the earth, and all the
    hosts of them. And the Gods said among themselves, On the seventh
    time, we will end our work, which we have counseled; and we will
    rest on the seventh time from all our work which we have counseled.
    And the Gods concluded upon the seventh time, because that on the
    seventh time they would rest from all their works, which they, the
    Gods, counseled among themselves to form, and sanctified it. And
    thus were their decisions, at the time that they counseled among
    themselves to form the heavens and the earth. And the Gods came
    down and formed these, the generations of the heavens and of the
    earth, when they were formed, in the day that the Gods formed the
    earth and the heavens, according to all that which they had said,
    concerning every plant of the field, before it was in the earth,
    and every herb of the field, before it grew; for the Gods had not
    caused it to rain upon the earth, when they counseled to do them;
    and had not formed a man to till the ground; but there went up a
    mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.
    And the Gods formed man from the dust of the ground, and took his
    spirit, that is the man's spirit, and put it into him, and breathed
    into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul.

    31. And the Gods planted a garden, eastward in Eden, and there they
    put the man, whose spirit they had put into the body, which they
    had formed. And out of the ground made the Gods to grow every tree
    that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life
    also, in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good
    {534} and evil. There was a river running out of Eden, to water the
    garden, and from thence it was parted and became into four heads.
    And the Gods took the man and put him in the garden of Eden, to
    dress it and to keep it; and the Gods commanded the man, saying: Of
    every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat, but of the tree
    of knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it; for in
    the time that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die. Now I,
    Abraham, saw that it was after the Lord's time, which was after the
    time of Kolob; for as yet, the Gods had not appointed unto Adam his
    reckoning.

    32. And the Gods said, Let us make an helpmeet for the man, for it
    is not good that the man should be alone, therefore we will form
    an helpmeet for him. And the Gods caused a deep sleep to fall upon
    Adam; and he slept, and they took one of his ribs, and closed up
    the flesh in the stead thereof, and of the rib which the Gods had
    taken from man, formed they a woman, and brought her unto the man.
    And Adam said this was bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh,
    now she shall be called woman, because she was taken out of man;
    therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother and shall
    cleave unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh. And they were
    both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed. And out of
    the ground the Gods formed every beast of the field, and every fowl
    of the air, and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call
    them, and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that should
    be the name thereof. And Adam gave names to all cattle, to the fowl
    of the air, to every beast of the field; and for Adam, there was
    found an helpmeet for him.

Footnotes:

1. For an account of how the Prophet came into possession of the Book
of Abraham see this History Vol. II, pp. 235, 6, 8; also 286, and more
especially pp. 349-50, and _note_ p. 350.

2. The Book of Abraham was first published in the _Times and Seasons_
in two numbers, Vol. III, Nos. 9 and 10, March 1 and March 15, 1842,
respectively. In this form it was copied into the Prophet's history
with the several historical items which occurred between the dates of
the publication of the two parts, and in this form is found in the
_Millennial Star_, Vol. XIX, pp. 100-103 and 164-168; but it is now
thought proper to publish the Book of Abraham entire without dividing
it into two articles, as in the above named periodicals.

It is important to note also that the Book of Abraham was published in
the _Times and Seasons_ when the Prophet was responsible editor of the
periodical (he announces his editorial responsibility in No. 9 of Vol.
III, p. 710). Attention is called to this fact, in passing, because it
is contended on the part of some, that the doctrine of the plurality
of divine personages, as now understood by the Church, was not a
doctrine taught by Joseph Smith; whereas it is a doctrine of the Book
of Abraham, as will be seen by reference to it, published by him in a
periodical of which he was the responsible editor; and, moreover, the
Book of Abraham was often referred to by the Prophet in approving terms.

{535}



CHAPTER XXXI.

The Wentworth Letter. [1]

_March 1, 1842_.--At the request of Mr. John Wentworth, Editor and
Proprietor of the _Chicago Democrat_, I have written the following
sketch of the rise, progress, persecution, and faith of the Latter-day
Saints, of which I have the honor, under God, of being the founder. Mr.
Wentworth says that he wishes to furnish Mr. Bastow, a friend of his,
who is writing the history of New Hampshire, with this document. As Mr.
Bastow has {536} taken the proper steps to obtain correct information,
all that I shall ask at his hands, is, that he publish the account
entire, ungarnished, and without misrepresentation.

    I was born in the town of Sharon, Windsor County, Vermont, on
    the 23rd of December, A. D. 1805. When ten years old, my parents
    removed to Palmyra, New York, where we resided about four years,
    and from thence we removed to the town of Manchester. My father was
    a farmer and taught me the art of husbandry. When about fourteen
    years of age, I began to reflect upon the importance of being
    prepared for a future state, and upon inquiring [about] the plan
    of salvation, I find that there was a great clash in religious
    sentiment; if I went to one society they referred me to one plan,
    and another to another; each one pointing to his own particular
    creed as the _summum bonum_ of perfection. Considering that all
    could not be right, and that God could not be the author of so much
    confusion, I determined to investigate the subject more fully,
    believing that if God had a Church it would not be split up into
    factions, and that if He taught one society to worship one way, and
    administer in one set of ordinances, He would not teach another,
    principles which were diametrically opposed.

    Believing the word of God, I had confidence in the declaration of
    James--"If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth
    to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given
    him." I retired to a secret place in a grove, and began to call
    upon the Lord; while fervently engaged in supplication, my mind was
    taken away from the objects with which I was surrounded, and I was
    enwrapped in a heavenly vision, and saw two glorious personages,
    who exactly resembled each other in features and likeness,
    surrounded with a brilliant light which eclipsed the sun at noon
    day. They told me that all religious denominations were believing
    in incorrect doctrines, and that none of them was acknowledged of
    God as His Church and kingdom: and was expressly commanded "to go
    not after them," at the same time receiving a promise that the
    fullness of the Gospel should at some future time be made known
    unto me.

    On the evening on the 21st of September, A. D. 1823, while I was
    praying unto God, and endeavoring to exercise faith in the precious
    promises of Scripture, on a sudden a light like that of day, only
    of a far purer and more glorious appearance and brightness, burst
    into the room, indeed the first sight was as though the house was
    filled with consuming fire; the appearance produced a shock that
    affected the whole body; in a moment a personage stood before me
    surrounded with a glory yet greater than that with which I was
    already surrounded. This messenger {537} proclaimed himself to be
    an angel of God, sent to bring the joyful tidings that the covenant
    which God made with ancient Israel was at hand to be fulfilled,
    that the preparatory work for the second coming of the Messiah was
    speedily to commence; that the time was at hand for the Gospel in
    all its fullness to be preached in power, unto all nations that a
    people might be prepared for the Millennial reign. I was informed
    that I was chosen to be an instrument in the hands of God to bring
    about some of His purposes in this glorious dispensation.

    I was also informed concerning the aboriginal inhabitants of this
    country and shown who they were, and from whence they came; a brief
    sketch of their origin, progress, civilization, laws, governments,
    of their righteousness and iniquity, and the blessings of God being
    finally withdrawn from them as a people, was made known unto me;
    I was also told where were deposited some plates on which were
    engraven an abridgment of the records of the ancient Prophets that
    had existed on this continent. The angel appeared to me three times
    the same night and unfolded the same things. After having received
    many visits from the angels of God unfolding the majesty and glory
    of the events that should transpire in the last days, on the
    morning of the 22nd of September, A. D. 1827, the angel of the Lord
    delivered the records into my hands.

    These records were engraven on plates which had the appearance of
    gold, each plate was six inches wide and eight inches long, and not
    quite so thick as common tin. They were filled with engravings,
    in Egyptian characters, and bound together in a volume as the
    leaves of a book, with three rings running through the whole.
    The volume was something near six inches in thickness, a part of
    which was sealed. The characters on the unsealed part were small,
    and beautifully engraved. The whole book exhibited many marks
    of antiquity in its construction, and much skill in the art of
    engraving. With the records was found a curious instrument, which
    the ancients called "Urim and Thummim," which consisted of two
    transparent stones set in the rim of a bow fastened to a breast
    plate. Through the medium of the Urim and Thummim I translated the
    record by the gift and power of God.

    In this important and interesting book the history of ancient
    America is unfolded, from its first settlement by a colony that
    came from the Tower of Babel, at the confusion of languages to
    the beginning of the fifth century of the Christian Era. We are
    informed by these records that America in ancient times has been
    inhabited by two distinct races of people. The first were called
    Jaredites, and came directly from the Tower of Babel. The second
    race came directly from the city of Jerusalem, about six hundred
    years before Christ. They were principally Israelites, of the
    descendants of Joseph. The Jaredites were destroyed about the time
    that the Israelites came from Jerusalem, who succeeded {538} them
    in the inheritance of the country. The principal nation of the
    second race fell in battle towards the close of the fourth century.
    The remnant are the Indians that now inhabit this country. This
    book also tells us that our Savior made His appearance upon this
    continent after His resurrection; that He planted the Gospel here
    in all its fulness, and richness, and power, and blessing; that
    they had Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, and Evangelists;
    the same order, the same priesthood, the same ordinances,
    gifts, powers, and blessings, as were enjoyed on the eastern
    continent, that the people were cut off in consequence of their
    transgressions, that the last of their prophets who existed among
    them was commanded to write an abridgment of their prophecies,
    history, &c, and to hide it up in the earth, and that it should
    come forth and be united with the Bible for the accomplishment of
    the purposes of God in the last days. For a more particular account
    I would refer to the Book of Mormon, which can be purchased at
    Nauvoo, or from any of our Traveling Elders.

    As soon as the news of this discovery was made known, false
    reports, misrepresentation and slander flew, as on the wings of
    the wind, in every direction; the house was frequently beset by
    mobs and evil designing persons. Several times I was shot at, and
    very narrowly escaped, and every device was made use of to get the
    plates away from me; but the power and blessing of God attended me,
    and several began to believe my testimony.

    On the 6th of April, 1830, the "Church of Jesus Christ of
    Latter-day Saints" was first organized in the town of Fayette,
    Seneca county, state of New York. Some few were called and
    ordained by the Spirit of revelation and prophecy, and began to
    preach as the Spirit gave them utterance, and though weak, yet
    were they strengthened by the power of God, and many were brought
    to repentance, were immersed in the water, and were filled with
    the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. They saw visions and
    prophesied, devils were cast out, and the sick healed by the laying
    on of hands. From that time the work rolled forth with astonishing
    rapidity, and churches were soon formed in the states of New York,
    Pennsylvania Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Missouri; in the last
    named state a considerable settlement was formed in Jackson county:
    numbers joined the Church and we were increasing rapidly; we made
    large purchases of land, our farms teemed with plenty, and peace
    and happiness were enjoyed in our domestic circle, and throughout
    our neighborhood; but as we could not associate with our neighbors
    (who were, many of them, of the basest of men, and had fled from
    the face of civilized society, to the frontier country to escape
    the hand of justice,) in their midnight revels, their Sabbath
    breaking, horse racing and gambling; they commenced at first to
    ridicule, then to persecute, {539} and finally an organized mob
    assembled and burned our houses, tarred and feathered and whipped
    many of our brethren, and finally, contrary to law, justice and
    humanity, drove them from their habitations; who, houseless and
    homeless, had to wander on the bleak prairies till the children
    left the tracks of their blood on the prairie. This took place
    in the month of November, and they had no other covering but the
    canopy of heaven, in this inclement season of the year; this
    proceeding was winked at by the government, and although we had
    warrantee deeds for our land, and had violated no law, we could
    obtain no redress.

    There were many sick, who were thus inhumanly driven from their
    houses, and had to endure all this abuse and to seek homes
    where they could be found. The result was, that a great many of
    them being deprived of the comforts of life, and the necessary
    attendances, died; many children were left orphans, wives, widows
    and husbands, widowers; our farms were taken possession of by the
    mob, many thousands of cattle, sheep, horses and hogs were taken,
    and our household goods, store goods, and printing press and type
    were broken, taken, or otherwise destroyed.

    Many of our brethren removed to Clay county, where they continued
    until 1836, three years; there was no violence offered, but there
    were threatenings of violence. But in the summer of 1836 these
    threatenings began to assume a more serious form, from threats,
    public meetings were called, resolutions were passed, vengeance and
    destruction were threatened, and affairs again assumed a fearful
    attitude, Jackson county was a sufficient precedent, and as the
    authorities in that county did not interfere they boasted that they
    would not in this; which on application to the authorities we found
    to be too true, and after much privation and loss of property, we
    were again driven from our homes.

    We next settled in Caldwell and Daviess counties, where we made
    large and extensive settlements, thinking to free ourselves from
    the power of oppression, by settling in new counties, with very
    few inhabitants in them; but here we were not allowed to live in
    peace, but in 1838 we were again attacked by mobs, an exterminating
    order was issued by Governor Boggs, and under the sanction of
    law, an organized banditti ranged through the country, robbed us
    of our cattle, sheep, hogs, &c., many of our people were murdered
    in cold blood, the chastity of our women was violated, and we
    were forced to sign away our property at the point of the sword;
    and after enduring every indignity that could be heaped upon us
    by an inhuman, ungodly band of marauders, from twelve to fifteen
    thousand souls, men, women, and children were driven from their
    own firesides, and from lands to which they had warrantee deeds,
    houseless, friendless, and homeless (in the depths of winter) to
    wander as exiles on the earth, or to seek an asylum in a more {540}
    genial clime, and among a less barbarous people. Many sickened and
    died in consequence of the cold and hardships they had to endure;
    many wives were left widows, and children, orphans, and destitute.
    It would take more time than is allotted me here to describe the
    injustice, the wrongs, the murders the bloodshed, the theft, misery
    and woe that have been caused by the barbarous, inhuman, and
    lawless proceedings of the state of Missouri.

    In the situation before alluded to, we arrived in the state of
    Illinois in 1839, where we found a hospitable people and a friendly
    home; a people who were willing to be governed by the principles
    of law and humanity. We have commenced to build a city called
    "Nauvoo," in Hancock county. We number from six to eight thousand
    here, besides vast numbers in the county around, and in almost
    every county of the state. We have a city charter granted us,
    and charter for a Legion, the troops of which now number 1,500.
    We have also a charter for a University, for an Agricultural and
    Manufacturing Society, have our own laws and administrators, and
    possess all the privileges that other free and enlightened citizens
    enjoy.

    Persecution has not stopped the progress of truth, but has only
    added fuel to the flame, it has spread with increasing rapidity.
    Proud of the cause which they have espoused, and conscious of our
    innocence, and of the truth of their system, amidst calumny and
    reproach, have the Elders of this Church gone forth, and planted
    the Gospel in almost every state in the Union; it has penetrated
    our cities, it has spread over our villages, and has caused
    thousands of our intelligent, noble, and patriotic citizens to
    obey its divine mandates, and be governed by its sacred truths. It
    has also spread into England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales, where,
    in the year 1840, a few of our missionaries were sent, and over
    five thousand joined the Standard of Truth; there are numbers now
    joining in every land.

    Our missionaries are going forth to different nations, and in
    Germany, Palestine, New Holland, Australia, the East Indies, and
    other places, the Standard of Truth has been erected; no unhallowed
    hand can stop the work from progressing; persecutions may rage,
    mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may defame, but the
    truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent, till it
    has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every
    country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall
    be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done.

    We believe in God the eternal Father, and in His Son Jesus Christ,
    and in the Holy Ghost.

    We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not
    for Adam's transgression.

    {541} We believe that through the atonement of Christ all mankind
    may be saved by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel.

    We believe that the first principle and ordinances of the Gospel
    are: (1) Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; (2) Repentance; (3)
    Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; (4) Laying on of
    hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.

    We believe that a man must be called of God by prophecy and by
    the laying on hands, by those who are in authority, to preach the
    Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof.

    We believe in the same organization that existed in the primitive
    Church, viz.: apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists,
    etc.

    We believe in the gift of tongues, prophecy, revelation, visions,
    healing, interpretation of tongues, etc.

    We believe the Bible to be the word of God, as far as it is
    translated correctly; we also believe the Book of Mormon to be the
    word of God.

    We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal,
    and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important
    things pertaining to the kingdom of God.

    We believe in the literal gathering of Israel and in the
    restoration of the Ten Tribes: that Zion will be built upon this
    [the American] continent; that Christ will reign personally upon
    the earth; and that the earth will be renewed and receive its
    paradisiacal glory.

    We claim the privilege of worshiping Almighty God according to
    the dictates of our own conscience, and allow all men the same
    privilege, let them worship how, where, or what they may.

    We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers and
    magistrates, in obeying honoring and sustaining the law.

    We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous,
    and in doing good to _all men_; indeed we may say that we follow
    the admonition of Paul, "We believe all thing, we hope all things,
    we have endured many things, and hope to be able to endure all
    things. If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report,
    or praiseworthy, we seek after these things."

    Respectfully, &c.,

    Joseph Smith.

Footnotes:

1. The "Wentworth Letter" is one of the choicest documents in our
Church literature; as also it is the earliest published document by the
Prophet making any pretension to consecutive narrative of those events
in which the great latter-day work had its origin. It was published in
number 9 of Volume III of the "Times and Seasons," March 1st, 1841;
while the publication of that more pretentious History of the Church
under the title "History of Joseph Smith," of which these volumes are
but a reproduction, was not commenced until number 10, Volume III, of
the "Times and Seasons," March 15th, 1841. Introducing this "History
of Joseph Smith," in the "Times and Seasons" (Vol. III, p. 726) is
the following note referring to the Wentworth Letter and the more
pretentious "History."

"In the last number I gave a brief history of the rise and progress
of the Church, I now enter more particularly into that history, and
extract from my journal."

Referring again to this Wentworth Letter, I may say that for combining
conciseness of statement with comprehensiveness of treatment of the
subject with which it deals, it has few equals among historical
documents, and certainly none that excel it in our Church literature.
In it one has in a few pages (less than six of these pages) a
remarkably full history of the leading events in the Church, and
an epitome of her doctrines, from the beginning (the birth of the
Prophet, 1805) up to the date of publication, March, 1841, a period of
thirty-six years. The epitome of the doctrines of the Church, since
called "The Articles of Faith," and published by millions, has been
carried to all the nations of the earth and tribes of men where the
gospel has been preached. These Articles of Faith were not produced
by the labored efforts and harmonized contentions of scholastics, but
were struck off by one inspired mind at a single effort to make a
declaration of that which is most assuredly believed by the Church, for
one making earnest inquiry about the truth. The combined directness,
perspicuity, simplicity and comprehensiveness of this statement of the
principles of our religion may be relied upon as strong evidence of a
divine inspiration resting upon the Prophet, Joseph Smith.

{542}



CHAPTER XXXII.

The Bennett-Dyer Correspondence--The Prophet's Discourse on the Subject
of the Resurrection, and the Salvation of Children--Epistle of the
Twelve to the Saints in England Concerning Their Emigration to America.

[Sidenote: Tax Controversy.]

_Wednesday, March 2_.--I read the proof of the _Times and Seasons_,
as editor for the first time, No. 9, Vol. III, in which is the
commencement of the Book of Abraham; [1] paid taxes to Mr. Bagby, in
the general business office for county and state purposes, but refused
to pay the taxes in the city and town of Commerce, as the demand was
illegal, there being no such place known in law, the city and town of
Commerce having been included in the city plat of Nauvoo, but continued
by our enemies on the tax list for the purpose of getting more money
from the Saints; I commenced a settlement with Gilbert Granger on the
estate [Kirtland] of his father, Oliver Granger; and continued in my
office till nine in the evening, having received a visit from General
Dudley of Connecticut.

_Thursday, 3_.--I attended council in the general business office (over
the store) at nine o'clock a. m.

[Sidenote: Attempted Settlement with Gilbert Granger.]

In the afternoon, continued the settlement with Gilbert Granger, but
finally failed to effect anything, except to get Newel's note. [2]
Granger refused to give up the papers to me, which he had received
of his father, the same being Church property, although I presented
him deeds, {543} mortgages and paper to the amount of some thousands
against his father, more than he had against the Church.

I also wrote Hiram Barney, Esq., of New York, in reply to his letter
of the 24th of January, offering him one hundred dollars per acre, for
his twenty acres of land in this city, lying somewhere between the
Hotchkiss purchase on the north, and Galland's purchase on the south,
or to take an agency to sell the same.

[Sidenote: Book of Abraham Fac-simile.]

_Friday, 4_.--At my office exhibiting the Book of Abraham in the
original to Brother Reuben Hedlock, so that he might take the size of
the several plates or cuts, and prepare the blocks for the _Times and
Seasons_; and also gave instruction concerning the arrangement of the
writing on the large cut, [3] illustrating the principles of astronomy,
with other general business.

Attended city council, and moved "that when property is sold at
sheriff's, marshal's or constable's sale under ordinance of this city,
the persons having their property sold shall have the privilege of
redeeming the same, by paying the principal and fifteen per cent on
principal, with cost and charges, within thirty days after sale."

_Saturday, 5_.--Attended the city council, and spoke at considerable
length on the powers and privileges of our city charter; among
other business of importance, the office of registrar of deeds was
established in the city of Nauvoo, and I was chosen registrar by the
city council.

_Sunday 6_.--I preached at Elder Orson Spencer's near the Temple.

_Monday, 7_.--At the general business office. Peter Melling, the
Patriarch from England, brought to the office cash $13.47 1/2, and
clothing $65 from Parley P. Pratt and Amos Fielding, of England; I
transacted much general business and wrote the mayor as follows:

    {544} _Letter of the Prophet to John C. Bennett--on Bennett's
    Correspondence Anent Slavery_.

    Editor's Office, Nauvoo, Illinois, March 7, 1842.

    _General Bennett_:

    Respected Brother:--I have just been perusing your correspondence
    with Doctor Dyer, on the subject of American slavery, and the
    students of the Quincy Mission Institute, and it makes my blood
    boil within me to reflect upon the injustice, cruelty, and
    oppression of the rulers of the people. When will these things
    cease to be, and the Constitution and the laws again bear rule? I
    fear for my beloved country--mob violence, injustice and cruelty
    appear to be the darling attributes of Missouri, and no man taketh
    it to heart! _O tempora! O mores_! What think you should be done?

    Your friend,

    Joseph Smith.

    _Correspondence between Dr. C. V. Dyer and General J. C. Bennett_.
    [4]

    Chicago, January 3, 1842.

    Dear Sir:--I am not sure that I am not indebted to you for your
    last letter, not having answered it, as I remember. But as I
    have been very sick during the long interval of my silence, you
    will readily excuse any apparent neglect on my part. I thank you
    for your paper sent me, the _Times and Seasons_, and have got
    much information from it, and since that, from other sources, in
    relation to the outrages committed upon the Latter-day Saints by
    the authorities as well as the people of the state of Missouri;
    and my blood boiled with indignation to see the whole Christian
    world--and the whole political world, too, look tamely on, and
    never raise a warning voice--a voice of expostulation, nor even
    giving the facts in the case! O what outrages will not be allowed
    or winked at by those in authority, and the people generally, if
    they happen to be inflicted upon those who bear an {545} unpopular
    name, espouse an unpopular cause, and are poor and obscure! It
    seems as if we had again fallen upon the middle ages, when the
    privileged classes could pour out their sympathies by the hour,
    and the very circumstantial and minute details of the loss of
    the life, or any other serious evil that befell one of their own
    number; but they could write [of] of hear without emotion, and
    even with satisfaction and joy, the history of the massacre of a
    thousand defenseless women and children, if they belonged to the
    common sort of people. Just read, for example, Madame de Sevigne's
    account in a letter to her daughter, dated "Aux Rochers," 30
    Oct., 1675, in the second volume of De Toquerville's Democracy in
    America. What, my dear sir, do you think of the treatment which the
    subject of American slavery receives at the hands of the American
    press--amongst the people generally, and especially in the halls
    of Congress? What think you of the sentencing of three men from
    the Quincy Mission Institute in this state, a short time since,
    to twelve years confinement in the penitentiary of Missouri, for
    no crime at all, or only such as God would regard as a virtue?
    Please look into this matter, and see if you cannot join with the
    benevolent and fearless, and call the attention of the nation or
    the state, to these outrages of Missouri, I send you a paper, and
    mark one of the pieces for your perusal. Read it. I do not know
    whether you have examined the whole subject of American slavery;
    but if you have not, I beseech you to do so, and let me hear from
    you. Is it not sin? Yes. Then is it not right to repent of it? Yes.
    When? God allows not a moment. Is not repentance and abandonment
    of sin safe, so long as God commands, and stands ready to look
    after the consequences? Certainly so. Well, can any court, either
    state or national, rob me of liberty for twelve years (even against
    their own state laws), for acting precisely in accordance with the
    letter and spirit of the Constitution of the United States, and the
    precepts of Jesus Christ? Is it to be submitted to tamely, that
    three men shall be immured in a dungeon for twelve years, torn from
    their families and friends, and from society and usefulness, for
    barely teaching a fellow being how to go to a place where he may
    learn the sciences--have his own wages, aye, and his own person?
    Let me hear from you. Have we not a right to sympathize with each
    other?

    I am, very sincerely, your friend and obedient servant,

    Charles V. Dyer.

    _Gen. John C. Bennett_.

    Nauvoo, Hancock county, Illinois.

    Nauvoo, Ill., January 20th, A. D. 1842.

    Dear Sir:--Yours of the 3rd inst., accompanied by the _Genius
    of Liberty_, containing the address of Alvin Stewart, Esq., is
    before me, {546} and I seize upon this, the first, opportunity to
    reply. You refer me to Madame de Sevigne's letter to her daughter,
    dated "Aux Rochers," 30th Oct., A. D. 1675, in the second volume
    of De Toquerville's Democracy in America; and ask me to examine
    the subject of American slavery. I have done so: I gave it a full
    and fair investigation years ago--I swore in my youth that my
    hands should never be bound nor my feet fettered, nor my tongue
    palsied--I am the friend of liberty, "Universal liberty," both
    civil and religious. I ever detested servile bondage. I wish to see
    the shackles fall from the feet of the oppressed, and the chains of
    slavery broken. I hate the oppressor's grasp, and the tyrant's rod;
    against them I set my brows like brass, and my face like steel; and
    my arm is nerved for the conflict. Let the sons of thunder speak,
    achieve victories before the cannon's mouth, and beard the lion in
    his den; till then the cry of the oppressed will not be heard; till
    then the wicked will not cease to trouble, nor the weary bondman be
    at rest. Great God, has it come to this--that the free citizens of
    the sovereign state of Illinois can be taken and immured within the
    walls of a Missouri penitentiary for twelve long years, for such a
    crime as God would regard as a virtue! simply for pointing bondsmen
    to a state of liberty and law! and no man take it to heart? Never,
    no never, no never! Let the friends of freedom arise and utter
    their voice, like the voice of ten thousand thunders--let them take
    every constitutional means to procure a redress of grievances--let
    there be a concerted effort, and the victory is ours. Let the broad
    banners of freedom be unfurled, and soon the prison doors will be
    opened, the captive set at liberty, and the oppressed go free.
    Missouri will then remember the unoffending Mormons in the days
    of their captivity and bondage--when murder and rapine were her
    darling attribute,--why, my heart is filled with indignation, and
    my blood boils within me, when I contemplate the vast injustice and
    cruelty which Missouri has meted out to that great philanthropist
    and devout Christian, General Joseph Smith, and his honest and
    faithful adherents--the Latter-day Saints, or Mormons; but the
    time has passed, and God will avenge their wrongs in His own good
    time. Dr. Dyer, put your hand upon your heart, and remember Zion.
    Just investigate the wrongs which our people have suffered in their
    unprecedented privations, the confiscation of their property, and
    the murder of their friends--the persecutions of the Waldenses in
    former ages were not to be compared to it, and history affords
    not a parallel. Now let us make a strong, concerted, and vigorous
    effort, for Universal Liberty, to every soul of man--civil,
    religious and political. With high considerations of respect and
    esteem, suffer me to subscribe myself,

    Yours respectfully,

    _Charles V. Dyer, M. D_. John C. Bennett.

    {547} P. S. Gen. Smith informs me that there are white slaves in
    Missouri [5] (Mormons) in as abject servitude as the blacks, and
    we have, as yet, no means of redress! God grant that the day of
    righteous retribution may not be procrastinated.

    J. C. B.

    _Letter of John C. Bennett to Joseph Smith--Anent the Dyer-Bennett
    Correspondence_. [6]

    Mayor's Office, City of Nauvoo, Illinois,

    March 8, A. D., 1842.

    _Esteemed Friend_:

    Yours of the 7th inst. has been received, and I proceed to reply,
    without undue emotion or perturbation. You ask, "When will these
    things cease to be, and the Constitution and the laws again
    bear rule?" I reply--once that noble bird of Jove, our grand
    national emblem, soared aloft, bearing in her proud beak the
    words "Liberty and Law," and that man that had the temerity to
    ruffle her feathers, was made to feel the power of her talons; but
    a wily archer came, and with his venomed arrow dipped in Upas'
    richest sap, shot the flowing label from the eagle's bill--it
    fell inverted, and the bird was sick, and is--the label soon was
    trampled in the dust--the eagle bound and caged. The picture is
    now before you in bold relief. What think you should be done? The
    master spirits of the age must rise and break the cage, restore
    the label, unbind the bird, and let her tower unfettered in the
    air--then will the nation have repose, and the present minions of
    power hide their faces in the dust. Many of Missouri's noble sons
    detest her acts of cruelty and crime, and gladly would they wipe
    them from the escutcheon of her fame, and will; yes they will lend
    a helping hand--and all must help, for the time is at hand--and if
    man, rebellious, cowardly, faltering man, will not do the work,
    the thunderings of Sinai will wind up the scene--the blood of the
    murdered Mormons cries aloud for help, and the restoration of the
    inheritances of the Saints; and God has {548} heard the cry--and
    the moral battle must be fought, and the victory won, he who
    answers by fire will cause sword and flame to do their office,
    and again make the Constitution and the laws paramount to every
    other consideration--and I swear by the Lord God of Israel, that
    the sword shall not depart from my thigh, nor the buckler from my
    arm, until the trust is consummated, and the hydra-headed, fiery
    dragon slain. This done the proud southron will no longer boast of
    ill-gotten gain, or wash his hands in the blood of the innocent, or
    immure the freemen of the prairie State within Missouri's sullied,
    poisoned, deathly prison walls. Let us always take refuge under the
    broad folds of the Constitution and the laws, and fear no danger,
    for the day of vengeance will assuredly come when the Omnipotent
    hand of the Great God will effect the restitution of the trophies
    of the brigand victories of Missouri, and again place the Saints on
    high.

    Yours respectfully,

    John C. Bennett.

    _General Joseph Smith_.

_Tuesday, 8_.--Recommenced translating from the Records of Abraham for
the tenth number of the _Times and Seasons_, and was engaged at my
office day and evening.

_Wednesday, 9_.--Examining copy for the _Times and Seasons_, presented
by Messrs. Taylor and Bennett, and a variety of other business in my
office, in the morning; in the afternoon continued the translation of
the Book of Abraham, called at Bishop Knight's and Mr. Davis', with the
recorder, and continued translating and revising, and reading letters
in the evening, Sister Emma being present in the office.

I also wrote Edward Hunter, as follows--

    _Letter of the Prophet to Edward Hunter--Business Transactions_.

    Dear Sir:--I yesterday had the pleasure of receiving your letter of
    February 10. Am much pleased that you have effected a sale, and are
    so soon to be with us, &c.

    I have purchased the lands you desired, and will use my influence
    to have the improvements made which you wish. Brother Weiler
    received your letter and says he will do what he can to have all
    done.

    The eight hundred dollars for the Temple and Nauvoo House, I wish
    you to bring in goods, for which I will give you stock and credit
    as soon as received.

    I wish you to invest as much money as you possibly can in goods, to
    {549} bring here, and I will purchase them of you when you come, if
    we can agree on terms; or you can have my new brick store to rent.
    I wish the business kept up by some one in the building, as it is
    a very fine house, and cost me a handsome amount to build it. Some
    eight or ten thousand dollars worth of goods would be an advantage
    to this place; therefore, if you or some of the brethren, would
    bring them on, I have no doubt but that I can arrange for them in
    some way to your or their advantage.

    As to money matters here, the State Bank is down, and we cannot
    tell you what bank would be safe a month hence. I would say that
    gold and silver is the only safe money a man can keep these times,
    you can sell specie here for more premium than you have to give;
    therefore there would be no loss and it would be safe. The bank you
    deposit in might fail before you had time to draw out again.

    I am now very busily engaged in translating, and therefore cannot
    give as much time to public matters as I could wish, but will
    nevertheless do what I can to forward your affairs. I will send you
    a memorandum of such goods as will suit this market.

    Yours affectionately,

    Joseph Smith.

_Thursday, 10_.--Gave instructions concerning a deed to Stephen
Markham, Shadrack Roundy, and Hiram Clark, and letter of attorney from
Miss Smith to Edward Hunter, and did a great variety of business; rode
out; and in the evening attended trial at Brother Hyrum's office, the
City of Nauvoo _versus_ Amos Davis, for indecent and abusive language
about me while at Mr. Davis' the day previous. The charges were clearly
substantiated by the testimony of Dr. Foster, Mr. and Mrs. Hibbard, and
others. Mr. Davis was found guilty by the jury, and by the municipal
court, bound over to keep the peace six months, under $100 bond; after
which I retired to the printing office with Emma, and supped with the
Twelve and their wives, who were spending the evening with Sister Hyde.

_Friday, 11_.

    _Extract from the Legion Minutes_.

    The Nauvoo Legion was on parade, commanded by Lieutenant-General
    Joseph Smith in person. Several of the Twelve Apostles rode in
    {550} the general staff as Chaplains. The line was formed at ten
    o'clock, a. m., and soon the Legion marched from their usual place
    of parade, below the Temple, to Water-street, in front of General
    Smith's house, where the troops were inspected, and after a recess
    marched west on the bank of the river, and taking a circuitous
    route, resumed their usual post on the parade ground, and closed
    the day in good order and with good feelings, and to the full
    satisfaction of the Commander-in-Chief.

    _Extract of High Council Minutes_.

    In the evening President Smith attended the trial of Elder Francis
    Gladden Bishop, at his (the president's) house. Elder Bishop
    appeared before the High Council of Nauvoo on complaint of having
    received, written, and published or taught certain "revelations"
    and doctrines not consistent with the Doctrine and Covenants of the
    Church. Mr. Bishop refusing to present the written "revelation" the
    Mayor, (John C. Bennett) issued his warrant and brought them before
    the council, when parts of the same were read by Mr. Bishop himself
    to council, the whole mass of which appeared to be the extreme of
    folly, nonsense, absurdity, falsehood and bombastic egotism--so
    much so as to keep the Saints laughing, when not overcome by sorrow
    and shame. President Joseph explained the nature of the case and
    gave a very clear elucidation of the tendency of such prophets and
    prophesyings, and gave Mr. Bishop over to the buffetings of Satan
    until he shall learn wisdom. After a few appropriate observations
    from Patriarch Hyrum and some of the council, the council voted
    unanimously that Francis Gladden Bishop be removed from the
    fellowship of the Church; President Joseph having previously
    committed the "revelation" above referred to, to the flames.

_Saturday, 12_.--I presided over a court-martial of the officers of
the Nauvoo Legion at my own house, for the purpose of deciding upon
the rank and station of the several officers, and the more perfect
organization of the Legion.

_Sunday, 13_.--I was with my family.

_Monday, 14_.--Transacted a great variety of business at the office.

_Tuesday, 15_.--I officiated as grand chaplain at the installation of
the Nauvoo Lodge of Free Masons, at the Grove near the Temple. Grand
Master Jonas, of Columbus, being present, a large number of people
assembled {551} on the occasion. The day was exceedingly fine; all
things were done in order, and universal satisfaction was manifested.
In the evening I received the first degree in Free Masonry in the
Nauvoo Lodge, assembled in my general business office.

Some time previous to this [March 15th] Sister Elizabeth Morgan died at
London without medical aid, after calling for the Elders, &c., which
created much excitement, and a coroner's inquest was called by Mr.
Baker, who brought in a verdict of "natural death."

    _The Prophet Becomes Editor of the Times and Seasons_.

    This paper commences my editorial career: I alone stand responsible
    for it, and shall do for all papers [i. e. Nos. of the _Times and
    Seasons_,] having my signature henceforward. I am not responsible
    for the publication or arrangement of the former paper; the matter
    did not come under my supervision.

    Joseph Smith.

We extract the following from the New York _Tribune_:

    _Honor Among Thieves_.

    "The paymaster of the Missouri Militia, called out to put down the
    Mormons some two years since, was supplied with money some time
    since, and started for Western Missouri, but has not yet arrived
    there. It is feared he has taken the Saline slope."

    We are not surprised that persons who could wantonly, barbarously,
    and without shadow of law, drive fifteen thousand men, women and
    children from their homes, should have among them a man who was so
    lost to every sense of justice, as to run away with the wages for
    this infamous deed; it is not very difficult for men who can blow
    out the brains of children; who can shoot down and hew to pieces
    our ancient veterans who fought in defense of our country, and
    delivered it from the oppressor's grasp; who could deliberately and
    in cold blood, murder men and rob them of their boots, watches,
    &c., and whilst their victims were yet weltering in their blood,
    and grappling with death, proceed to rob the widows' houses. Men
    who can deliberately do this, and steal nearly all the horses,
    cattle, sheep, hogs, and property of a whole community, and drive
    them from their homes _en masse_, in an {552} inclement season of
    the year, will not find many qualms of conscience in stealing the
    pay of his brother thieves, and taking the "Saline slope." The very
    idea of Government paying these men for their bloody deeds, must
    cause the sons of liberty to blush, and to hang their harps upon
    the willow, and make the blood of every patriot run chill.

    The proceedings of that state have been so barbarous and inhuman
    that our indignation is aroused when we reflect upon the scene. We
    are here reminded of one of the patriotic deeds of the government
    of that state, who after they had robbed us of everything we had in
    the world, and taken from us many hundred thousand dollars' worth
    of property, had their sympathies so far touched (_alias_ their
    good name) that they voted two thousand dollars to the relief of
    the "_suffering Mormons_," and choosing two or three of her noblest
    sons, to carry their heavenly boon, these angels of salvation
    came in the plentitude of their mercy and in the dignity of their
    office to Far West. To do what? To feed its hungry and clothe its
    naked with the $2,000? Verily nay! but to go into Daviess county
    and steal the Mormons' hogs (which they were prohibited themselves
    from obtaining under penalty of death) to distribute among the
    destitute, and to sell where they could obtain the money. These
    hogs thus obtained were shot down in their blood and not otherwise
    bled; they were filthy to a degree. These, the Mormons' own
    hogs, and a few goods, the sweepings of an old store in Liberty,
    were what these patriotic and noble-minded men gave to the "poor
    Mormons," and then circulated to the world how sympathetic,
    benevolent, kind and merciful the Legislature of the State of
    Missouri was, in giving two thousand dollars to the "suffering
    Mormons." Surely "the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel."

_Wednesday, March 16_.--I was with the Masonic Lodge and rose to the
sublime degree.

_Thursday, 17_.--The High Council withdrew the hand of fellowship from
Elder Oliver Olney for setting himself up as a prophet, and took his
license.

[Sidenote: Origin of the Female Relief Society.]

I assisted in commencing the organization of "The Female Relief Society
of Nauvoo" in the Lodge Room. Sister Emma Smith, President, and Sister
Elizabeth Ann Whitney and Sarah M. Cleveland, Counselors. I gave much
instruction, read in the New Testament, and Book of Doctrine and
Covenants, concerning the Elect Lady, and showed that the elect meant
to be elected to a certain work, &c., and {553} that the revelation
was then fulfilled by Sister Emma's election to the Presidency of the
Society, she having previously been ordained to expound the Scriptures.
Emma was blessed, and her counselors were ordained by Elder John Taylor.

_Friday, 18 and Saturday 19_.--At home and at my office engaged in
business, temporal and spiritual.

_Sunday, 20_.--I preached to a large assembly in the grove, near the
Temple on the west. The body of a deceased child of Mr. Windsor P. Lyon
being before the assembly, changed my design in the order of my remarks.

    [The following is a brief synopsis of the Prophet's remarks, by
    Elder Wilford Woodruff:]

    _The Prophet's Sermon on Life and Death; the Resurrection and the
    Salvation of Children_.

    President Smith read the 14th chapter of Revelation, and said--We
    have again the warning voice sounded in our midst, which shows
    the uncertainty of human life; and in my leisure moments I have
    meditated upon the subject, and asked the question, why it is that
    infants, innocent children, are taken away from us, especially
    those that seem to be the most intelligent and interesting. The
    strongest reasons that present themselves to my mind are these:
    This world is a very wicked world; and it is a proverb that the
    "world grows weaker and wiser;" if that is the case, the world
    grows more wicked and corrupt. In the earlier ages of the world a
    righteous man, and a man of God and of intelligence, had a better
    chance to do good, to be believed and received than at the present
    day: but in these days such a man is much opposed and persecuted
    by most of the inhabitants of the earth, and he has much sorrow to
    pass through here. The Lord takes many away, even in infancy, that
    they may escape the envy of man, and the sorrows and evils of this
    present world; they were too pure, too lovely, to live on earth;
    therefore, if rightly considered, instead of mourning we have
    reason to rejoice as they are delivered from evil, and we shall
    soon have them again.

    What chance is there for infidelity when we are parting with
    our friends almost daily? None at all. The infidel will grasp
    at every straw for help until death stares him in the face, and
    then his infidelity takes its flight, for the realities of the
    eternal world are resting upon him in mighty power; and when every
    earthly support and prop fails him, he {554} then sensibly feels
    the eternal truths of the immortality of the soul. We should take
    warning and not wait for the death-bed to repent, as we see the
    infant taken away by death, so may the youth and middle aged, as
    well as the infant be suddenly called into eternity. Let this,
    then, prove as a warning to all not to procrastinate repentance,
    or wait till a deathbed for it is the will of God that man should
    repent and serve Him in health, and in the strength and power of
    his mind, in order to secure His blessing, and not wait until he is
    called to die.

    The doctrine of baptizing children, or sprinkling them, or they
    must welter in hell, is a doctrine not true, not supported in Holy
    Writ, and is not consistent with the character of God. All children
    are redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ, and the moment that
    children leave this world, they are taken to the bosom of Abraham.
    The only difference between the old and young dying is, one lives
    longer in heaven and eternal light and glory than the other,
    and is freed a little sooner from this miserable, wicked world.
    Notwithstanding all this glory, we for a moment lose sight of it,
    and mourn the loss, but we do not mourn as those without hope.

    My intention was to have spoken on the subject of baptism, but
    having a case of death before us, I thought proper to refer to that
    subject. I will now, however say a few words upon baptism, as I
    intended.

    God has made certain decrees which are fixed and immovable: for
    instance,--God set the sun, the moon, and the stars in the heavens,
    and gave them their laws, conditions and bounds, which they cannot
    pass, except by His commandments; they all move in perfect harmony
    in their sphere and order, and are as lights, wonders and signs
    unto us. The sea also has its bounds which it cannot pass. God
    has set many signs on the earth, as well as in the heavens; for
    instance, the oak of the forest, the fruit of the tree, the herb
    of the field--all bear a sign that seed hath been planted there;
    for it is a decree of the Lord that every tree, plant, and herb
    bearing seed should bring forth of its kind, and cannot come forth
    after any other law or principle. Upon the same principle do I
    contend that baptism is a sign ordained of God, for the believer in
    Christ to take upon himself in order to enter into the kingdom of
    God, "for except ye are born of water and of the Spirit ye cannot
    enter into the kingdom of God," said the Savior. It is a sign and
    a commandment which God has set for man to enter into His kingdom.
    Those who seek to enter in any other way will seek in vain; for God
    will not receive them, neither will the angels acknowledge their
    works as accepted, for they have not obeyed the ordinances, nor
    attended to the signs which God ordained for the salvation of man,
    to prepare him for, and give him a title to, a celestial glory; and
    God had decreed that all who will not {555} obey His voice shall
    not escape the damnation of hell. What is the damnation of hell? To
    go with that society who have not obeyed His commands.

    Baptism is a sign to God, to angels, and to heaven that we do the
    will of God, and there is no other way beneath the heavens whereby
    God hath ordained for man to come to Him to be saved, and enter
    into the kingdom of God, except faith in Jesus Christ, repentance,
    and baptism for the remission of sins, and any other course is in
    vain; then you have the promise of the gift of the Holy Ghost.

    What is the sign of the healing of the sick? The laying on of hands
    is the sign or way marked out by James, and the custom of the
    ancient Saints as ordered by the Lord, and we cannot obtain the
    blessing by pursuing any other course except the way marked out by
    the Lord. What if we should attempt to get the gift of the Holy
    Ghost through any other means except the signs or way which God
    hath appointed--would we obtain it? Certainly not; all other means
    would fail. The Lord says do so and so, and I will bless you.

    There are certain key words and signs belonging to the Priesthood
    which must be observed in order to obtain the blessing. The sign of
    Peter was to repent and be baptized for the remission of sins, with
    the promise of the gift of the Holy Ghost; and in no other way is
    the gift of the Holy Ghost obtained.

    There is a difference between the Holy Ghost and the gift of
    the Holy Ghost. Cornelius received the Holy Ghost before he was
    baptized, which was the convincing power of God unto him of the
    truth of the Gospel, but he could not receive the gift of the Holy
    Ghost until after he was baptized. Had he not taken this sign or
    ordinance upon him, the Holy Ghost which convinced him of the truth
    of God, would have left him. Until he obeyed these ordinances and
    received the gift of the Holy Ghost, by the laying on of hands,
    according to the order of God, he could not have healed the sick or
    commanded an evil spirit to come out of a man, and it obey him; for
    the spirits might say unto him, as they did to the sons of Sceva:
    "Paul we know and Jesus we know, but who are ye?" It mattereth
    not whether we live long or short on the earth after we come to a
    knowledge of these principles and obey them unto the end. I know
    that all men will be damned if they do not come in the way which He
    hath opened, and this is the way marked out by the word of the Lord.

    As concerning the resurrection, I will merely say that all men will
    come from the grave as they lie down, whether old or young; there
    will not be "added unto their stature one cubit," neither taken
    from it; all will be raised by the power of God, having spirit in
    their bodies, and not blood. Children will be enthroned in the
    presence of God and the {556} Lamb with bodies of the same stature
    [7] that they had on earth, having been redeemed by the blood of
    the Lamb; they will there enjoy the fullness of that light, glory
    and intelligence, which is prepared in the celestial kingdom.
    "Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord, for they rest from their
    labors and their works do follow them."

    The speaker, before closing, called upon the assembly before him
    to humble themselves in faith before God, and in mighty prayer and
    {557} fasting to call upon the name of the Lord, until the elements
    were purified over our heads, and the earth sanctified under our
    feet, that the inhabitants of this city may escape the power of
    disease and pestilence, and the destroyer that rideth upon the face
    of the earth, and that the Holy Spirit of God may rest upon this
    vast multitude.

    At the close of the meeting, President Smith said he should attend
    to the ordinance of baptism in the river, near his house, at two
    o'clock, and at the appointed hour, the bank of the Mississippi
    was lined with a multitude of people, and President Joseph Smith
    went into the river and baptized eighty persons for the remission
    of their sins, and what added joy to the scene was, that the
    first person baptized was M. L. D. Wasson, a nephew of Mrs. Emma
    Smith--the first of her kindred that has embraced the fullness of
    the Gospel.

    At the close of this interesting scene, the administrator lifted
    up his hands towards heaven, and implored the blessing of God to
    rest upon the people; and truly the Spirit of God did rest upon the
    multitude, to the joy and consolation of our hearts.

    After baptism, the congregation again repaired to the grove, near
    the Temple, to attend to the ordinance of confirmation, and,
    notwithstanding President Smith had spoken in the open air to the
    people, and stood in the water and baptized about eighty persons,
    about fifty of those baptized received their confirmation under his
    hands in the after part of the day.

    While this was progressing, great numbers were being baptized in
    the font.

{558} After this, I baptized a large number in the font myself.

    _An Epistle of the Twelve to the Church of Jesus Christ of
    Latter-day Saints in its Various Branches and Conferences in
    Europe. Greeting_:

    Beloved Brethren.--We feel it our privilege and a duty we owe
    to the great and glorious cause in which we have enlisted, to
    communicate to you at this time, some principles which if carried
    into effect, will facilitate the gathering of the Saints, and
    tend to ameliorate the condition of those who are struggling
    with poverty and distress, in this day when the usual means of
    support seem to be cut short to the laboring classes, through the
    depression that everywhere prevails in the general business mart
    of the civilized world. Our situation is such in these last days,
    and our salvation spiritually is so connected with our salvation
    temporally, that if one fail, the other necessarily must be
    seriously affected, if not wholly destroyed. God has made us social
    beings; He has endowed us with capacities for enjoying each other's
    society, and it is our duty to bring those powers and privileges
    into exercise, so far as we can, and for this it is our duty to
    strive by all lawful and expedient measures within our reach.

    While we remain in this state of existence, we need food and
    raiment, habitations and society, and without these our enjoyments
    must be greatly limited, and the real object of our existence
    diminished, if not wholly destroyed. Though the Saints should
    possess all the common gifts of the Spirit of God, and yet remain
    destitute of those comforts so much needed for the sustenance of
    their bodies, they would be comparatively miserable; but when they
    arrive at that state of perfection, and are clothed upon with the
    more special gifts and power of increasing the widow's oil and
    meal, or if receiving their food from the ravens, like Elijah,
    they will not need to bestow so much attention on every trifle of
    the passing moments, as they now do; and until that period arrives
    they will recollect that to be in the exercise of the fullness of
    spiritual blessings they must be watchful and careful to provide
    things honest in the sight of all men for the sustenance and
    comfort of all these frail, perishable bodies. That we may be
    instruments in the hands of God of thus promoting your present and
    future temporal and spiritual welfare, we write you at the present
    time.

    Many of you are desirous of emigrating to this country, and many
    have not the means to accomplish their wishes, and if we can assist
    you by our prayers and our counsels to accomplish the desires of
    your hearts in this thing, so far we will rejoice and be satisfied.
    You not only wish to emigrate to this section of the earth, but you
    desire also to have some laudable means of comfortable subsistence
    after you arrive {559} here, and this also is important. How then,
    shall these things be accomplished and your souls be satisfied? We
    answer, by united understanding and concert of action.

    You all, or most of you, have trades or different kinds of
    business, with which you have been long familiarized, and in
    which you would like to continue for the purpose of procuring a
    subsistence; and a great proportion of your occupation is such that
    no employment can be had in this city or vicinity; for instance:
    there are no cotton manufactories established here, and many of you
    know no other business. You want to come here, and when here, want
    to continue your labors in your accustomed branches of business;
    but you have no means to get here, and when here there are no
    factories, and yet factories are needed here, and there would be a
    ready market for all the fabrics which could be manufactured.

    Now comes the concert of action; if the Church will arise unitedly;
    if the brethren will individually feel that the great work of
    the Lord is depending on themselves as instruments to assist in
    carrying it forward; and will unite all their means, faith and
    energy, in one grand mass, all that you desire can speedily be
    accomplished. A short time only will elapse before you yourselves
    will be astonished at the result, and you will feel that your
    desires are more than realized.

    While the Saints are united, no power on the earth, or under
    the earth can prevail against them; but while each one acts for
    himself, many, very many, are in danger of being overthrown.
    God has promised all things to those who love Him and keep His
    commandments; then why be afraid that one should get a little more
    than another, or that one should gain, for a little moment, what
    another might lose; when Jesus has promised that the faithful shall
    be one with Him, as He is one with the Father, and shall possess
    all things in the due time of the Lord; not by stealth, not by
    force, not by the sword, but by the gift of the Father, through
    faithfulness to His commands; and the more they shall suffer, while
    they work in righteousness on the earth, the greater will be their
    reward, the more glorious their kingdom, the more extended their
    power, when they shall arrive in the celestial paradise.

    Knowing and feeling these things as we do, and having respect unto
    the recompense of reward to be revealed hereafter, regardless of
    all necessary privation and labor to accomplish what our Master has
    given us to do, and desiring not to possess the kingdom alone, but
    that all the honest in heart should be united with us in the great
    and glorious work of building up Zion and her stakes, we will call
    upon you, dear brethren, to unite with us, all with one accord, to
    do what? To do the very things you desire should be done; to convey
    you to the place where you are, and then put you in possession of
    all the means {560} you may need for your support; so that you
    may enjoy the fullness of the blessings belonging to the sons and
    daughters of Zion's King.

    Had we means we would not ask your aid; we would gladly send the
    ships of Tarshish to bear you across the great waters, we would
    bring you to our homes, to our firesides; we would provide you
    habitations, lands and food, when you arrive among us. Our hearts
    are large enough to do all this, and a great deal more; but we have
    not the means; we have to labor for our own subsistence, as well
    as attend to those things which are laid upon us of the Lord, and
    which concern the whole Church as much as ourselves.

    It is not the will of heaven that any one should be put in
    possession of all things without striving for them. Where much is
    given, much is required; and he who has but one talent, must be as
    diligent in the use thereof as he that has ten, or he will lose his
    talent and his blessing; and it becometh him who hath but one, five
    or ten, to use them in the most economical manner possible, or he
    will not have enough to bring him hither; and that he who hath five
    pounds may have enough and to spare to him who hath but one, or in
    other words to help the brethren to accomplish with a little what
    otherwise would require much more than they can command, is the
    object of this Epistle.

    Had we the means we would send vessels of our own, laden with
    flour, meats, fruits, and all sea stores necessary for the comfort
    of the brethren on the water, so that they would have nothing more
    to do than go on shipboard, and land at New Orleans; from thence we
    would take them on our steamers, and bring them to this place, for
    this is the best place for the Saints to stop at for the present.

    There may be other places where individuals might have the prospect
    of adding at once, more rapidly to their pecuniary interest,
    than they could here; but we can only say, it is the will of the
    Lord that the Saints build Nauvoo, and settle therein or in the
    vicinity; and we know assuredly that those who give heed to every
    word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord, will be richer
    eventually--and not far distant--than those who may seem to prosper
    more by following their own inclinations.

    Brethren, we wish not to control you or your means; it is not
    for our peace or interest; nay, rather, it is a source of labor,
    trouble and anxiety to have ought to do with the pecuniary business
    of the Church, which we would gladly avoid, could we do it, and do
    our duty--could we do it, and the things desired be accomplished,
    and we stand guiltless where God hath placed us--and for this
    reason we desire to make such arrangements as will most tend to
    leave the business in your own hands, or in the hands of those
    whom you shall select; men of your own acquaintance, in whom you
    can repose confidence that they will execute {561} their trust
    in righteousness. And that our plans may be understood by you,
    and carried into execution, we have sent unto you our beloved
    brother, Elder John Snyder, the bearer of this Epistle, and other
    Epistles also, previously written by us to you; and we beseech you,
    brethren, to receive him as a servant of the Most High, authorized
    according to the order of the kingdom of heaven, and assist him by
    all lawful means in your power, to execute the mission entrusted
    to him; for great events depend upon his success; but to none will
    they be greater than to yourselves.

    Our authority for thus sending Brother Snyder to you, is found in
    the "Book of the Law of the Lord," page 36, as follows--

    "Nauvoo, December 22, 1841. The word of the Lord came unto Joseph
    the Seer; verily thus saith the Lord--Let my servant John Snyder
    take a mission to the Eastern continent, unto all the conferences
    now sitting in that region, and let him carry a package of epistles
    that shall be written by my servants the Twelve, making known unto
    the Saints their duties concerning the building of my houses, which
    I have appointed unto you, saith the Lord, that they may bring
    their gold, and their silver, and their precious stones, and the
    box tree, and the fir tree, and all fine wood to beautify the place
    of my sanctuary, saith the Lord, and let him return speedily, with
    all means which shall be put into his hands: even so. Amen."

    In this revelation, the brethren will discover their duty in
    relation to the building of the Temple of the Lord in Nauvoo, and
    the Nauvoo House; and we call upon them with united cry to give
    heed unto the things written, and help to build the houses which
    God has commanded, so that Brother Snyder may speedily return
    with means to strengthen the hands of the laborers, and adorn and
    beautify the Tabernacle of Jehovah.

    Brethren, while you are thus preparing to send up your offerings
    to this place, if you will act in concert with our well beloved
    brother, Elder Parley P. Pratt, and the regularly constituted
    authorities of the Church in England; and collect as great an
    amount of cotton, linen, and woollen goods, silks, cutlery, and
    hardware, &c., even all the varieties of goods which might be
    useful in this country, and which can be obtained by the brethren
    in this time of monied scarcity, and forward the same to us
    by Brother Snyder, or your own agent, in company with him, or
    otherwise, and at other times, we will pay you for those goods, in
    lands, in or out of the city, in houses, cattle, and such kind of
    property as you may need; and with those goods we will purchase
    lands, &c., flour, meat, and all things necessary for a sea voyage,
    which can be had cheaper here than in England, and charter ships,
    and forward the same to England, or such places as emigration may
    require, and bring back {562} in return a ship load of emigrants,
    at a cheaper rate than they can now emigrate; while, at the
    same time, those who remain can continue to collect and forward
    merchandize as before, which will give us the means of continuing
    our purchases here, of keeping ships passing and repassing, and of
    building manufacturing establishments ready for the brethren when
    they arrive in our midst.

    While the great depression of the moneyed institutions continues
    as it now is, the people are compelled to resort to all laudable
    measures to effect those exchanges of property which are necessary
    to accomplish their designs in removing from one place to another,
    and from one kingdom to another; and by a faithful execution of
    the plans proposed above, much, very much, may be effected in
    emigration without the aid of cash, or with very little, at the
    most; and goods may be obtained to advantage for houses and lands
    which the brethren may have to dispose of, and in payment of debts
    due them, when it would be impossible for them to sell for cash
    at any price, or get their pay for debts due them even at a great
    discount, and thus thousands and tens of thousands may be made to
    rejoice in this land of plenty, while, were it not for a concert
    of action, they might remain where they are for years, or never
    have the opportunity of appearing among us on this side the great
    waters, until the morning of the first resurrection.

    But, brethren, we want to see you here. We long to see all here who
    want to be here, and none others, for we desire the increase of
    those who love God and work righteousness, that Zion's cords may be
    lengthened, and her stakes strengthened; though the country is free
    to all who will abide her laws, and we have no disposition to cast
    out any from our midst who will submit thereto.

    For many particulars in relation to the times and course of
    emigration, and many other important items connected with the
    general and particular interest of the Church, we would refer
    you to our former epistles, as to enter into a particular and
    minute detail of all items referred to in this epistle, would
    be impossible. Brother Snyder will enter into the subject more
    minutely, and with the assistance of the presidency among you, will
    unfold the same, so that no one need misunderstand.

    The brethren need not suppose that this thing is of our own
    imagination, simply; or that the result thereof, if fully carried
    into execution, will be of doubtful character. We have been
    guided by the Spirit of the Lord in our deliberations concerning
    the matter; and have been instructed by the Prophet of the Most
    High, even Joseph, the Seer and Revelator, for the Church, whose
    instructions to us are as the voice of the Lord, and whose
    admonitions we ever regard as true and faithful, and worthy the
    confidence of al who profess the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

    {563} We have been with him in prosperity and adversity, in
    sickness and health, in public and private, in all situations
    where men may reasonably associate with each other, and know that
    his words are true, his teachings sacred, his character unsullied
    among men of truth, and that he is what the Church acknowledge him
    to be, a man of God, and the spokesman of the Most High unto His
    people; and we bear this testimony unto the world, calling on all
    the honest in heart to uphold him by their faith and prayers, that
    he may live long, enjoy much, and accomplish great things for the
    kingdom which he has been the honored instrument of establishing
    on the earth in these last days, even that he may lead a great
    multitude into the celestial kingdom.

    That the Saints may enjoy the teachings of the Prophet; those
    teachings which can be had only at this place, so that they may
    go on from knowledge to knowledge even to perfection, they want
    to come up hither; and that the plans before suggested may by
    facilitated, let some individuals with capital come immediately and
    build factories--individuals who have the means, understand the
    business, and are capable of superintending the concerns thereof.

    There is every natural advantage at this place for facilitating
    such an order of things; water, wood, and coal in abundance, and
    it only wants the hand of the laborer to bring them forth in form
    suited to their several uses; and, while the gold and the silver
    are secreted by the hands of unprincipled speculators, let us go
    forward and accomplish without gold or silver, that which might be
    more easily and expeditiously done with it.

    Let the brethren ever remember the admonitions we have so often
    given, that Zion is not to be built up without labor, fatigue, and
    trial of the faith of many; that when John saw the great company on
    Mount Zion, he saw those who had come up through great tribulation;
    he also saw those who had endured great tribulation after they had
    arrived, and before the kingdom was completed.

    The Saints of this day are of the number John saw, and those--and
    those only who are willing to endure tribulation, as good soldiers,
    without murmuring--will eventually find their names enrolled in the
    Lamb's Book of Life, and obtain an inheritance in the holy city.

    To all those who are desirous of sharing in the poverty and
    sufferings incident to new countries and the children of the
    kingdom, we would say, come up hither, and help us to bear the
    burden, and you shall share the riches, glory and honors of the
    kingdom. And those who are not willing to suffer afflictions,
    losses, crosses, and disappointments with the people of God, may as
    well stay away and be destroyed, as to come here and perish, for
    perish they must who cannot abide a celestial law, and endure to
    the end in all meekness, patience, and faithfulness.

    {564} Inasmuch as Elder Levi Richards has asked for counsel, we
    would recommend him to return to Nauvoo, as soon as circumstances
    shall permit.

    Praying that you may be blessed with wisdom, intelligence, and
    perseverance, in every good word and work, so that you may
    accomplish your desires, and help to roll on the great work in
    which you have enlisted, we subscribe ourselves your brethren and
    fellow laborers in the kingdom of patience. Amen.

    Brigham Young, President.

    Heber C. Kimball,

    William Smith,

    Orson Pratt,

    John E. Page,

    Lyman Wight,

    Wilford Woodruff,

    John Taylor,

    Geo. A. Smith.

    Willard Richards, Clerk.

    City of Nauvoo, Hancock County, Illinois, March 20, 1842.

Footnotes:

1. No. 9 of the _Times and Seasons_ was evidently not published on
time, since it is supposed to have been published on March the first,
and here is an account of the proofs being read on the second of March.

2. This refers doubtless to Bishop Newel K. Whitney.

3. This refers to Fac-simile No. 2, p. 521, which was published in the
_Times and Seasons_ in double page size.

4. The correspondence between Dr. Dyer, Chicago, and Dr. John C.
Bennett, referred to in the Prophet's letter above, is thought to be
of sufficient importance to be inserted in the body of the History,
though heretofore, when the history of the Prophet has been published,
it has been omitted. The case of the three men from the Quincy
Mission Institute being imprisoned for twelve years; in the Missouri
penitentiary "for no crime at all, or only as such us God would regard
as a virtue"--"for barely teaching a fellow being," as Dr. Dyer naively
put it, "how to go to a place where he may learn the sciences, have his
own wages, aye, and his own person." This case was one in which the
three men had violated some local law of the state of Missouri against
encouraging slaves to leave their masters for the purpose of going
into free states as the national fugitive slave law was not then in
existence, and was not enacted until 1850.

5. The "slaves" here referred to are explained in an editorial note
in the _Times and Seasons_ in which the above correspondence appears
(Vol. III, No. 10) to mean children of Mormon parentage still in
Missouri--"the children of murdered parents; others of Mormon parents
now in this city"--Nauvoo. The charge of their being "slaves" is
far-fetched and was made only because of the severe stress of feeling
experienced by the Saints when contemplating things that related to
Missouri, and some allowance must be made for the bombast, bragadocio
and hypocrisy of John C. Bennett.

6. Because of its bearing upon the character of John C. Bennett, as
also to complete this Dyer-Bennett correspondence, the letter of
John C. Bennett to the Prophet in answer to the note of the latter,
introducing this whole correspondence, the following communication is
inserted.

7. It must be remembered that the above report of the Prophet's
remarks, as also the report of the King Follett sermon (preached in
April, 1844, and which will appear in Volume V of this history), where
the same matter of infants being enthroned in power while remaining of
the same stature as when on earth, and at the time of their death, is
mentioned--were reported in long hand and from memory, so that they
are very likely to contain inaccuracies and convey wrong impressions.
This matter of children after the resurrection remaining of the same
stature as at their death is well known to be such an error. The writer
of this note distinctly remembers to have heard the late President
Wilford Woodruff, who reported the above sermon, say, that the Prophet
corrected the impression that had been made by his King Follett sermon,
that children and infants would remain fixed in the stature of their
infancy and childhood in and after the resurrection. President Woodruff
very emphatically said on the occasion of the subject being agitated
about 1888-9, that the prophet taught subsequently to his King Follett
sermon that children while resurrected in the stature at which they
died would develope to the full stature of men and women after the
resurrection; and that the contrary impression created by the report
of the Prophet's King Follett sermon was due to a misunderstanding
of his remarks and erroneous reporting. In addition to this personal
recollection of the writer as to the testimony of the late President
Wilford Woodruff, the following testimony of Elder Joseph Horne and
his wife, M. Isabella Horne, on the same subject is important. The
statements here copied were delivered in the presence of President
Angus M. Cannon, of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion, and Elder Arthur
Winter, at the residence of Brother Horne, in Salt Lake City, on
November 19, 1896, and were reported stenographically by Arthur Winter,
the Church official reporter.

_Sister M. Isabella Horne said_:

"In conversation with the Prophet Joseph Smith once in Nauvoo, the
subject of children in the resurrection was broached. I believe it was
in Sister Leonora Cannon Taylor's house. She had just lost one of her
children, and I had also lost one previously. The Prophet wanted to
comfort us, and he told us that we should receive those children in the
morning of the resurrection just as we laid them down, in purity and
innocence, and we should nourish and care for them as their mothers.
He said that children would be raised in the resurrection just as
they were laid down, and that they would obtain all the intelligence
necessary to occupy thrones, principalities and powers. The idea that
I got from what he said was that the children would grow and develop
in the Millennium, and that the mothers would have the pleasure of
training and caring for them, which they had been deprived of in this
life.

"This was sometime after the King Follett funeral, at which I was
present."

_Brother Joseph Horne_ said:

"I heard the Prophet Joseph Smith say that mothers should receive their
children just as they laid them down, and that they would have the
privilege of doing for them what they could not do here, the Prophet
remarked: "How would you know them if you did not receive them as you
laid them down?" I also got the idea that children would grow and
develop after the resurrection, and that the mothers would care for
them and train them."

"We hereby certify that the foregoing is a full, true and correct
account of the statements made by Joseph and M. Isabella Horne on the
subject mentioned."

Angus M. Cannon.

Arthur Winter.

We have read the foregoing, and certify that it is correct.

Joseph Horne.

M. Isabella Horne.

In the Improvement Era for June, 1904, President Joseph F. Smith in an
editorial on the Resurrection said:

"The body will come forth as it is laid to rest, for there is no growth
or development in the grave. As it is laid down, so will it arise, and
changes to perfection will come by the law of restitution. But the
spirit will continue to expand and develop, and the body, after the
resurrection will develop to the full stature of man."

This may be accepted as the doctrine of the Church in respect to the
resurrection of children and their future development to the full
stature of men and women; and it is alike conformable to that which
will be regarded as both reasonable and desirable.

{565}



CHAPTER XXXIII.

A Mason's Estimate of Nauvoo and the Prophet--Organization of the
Female Relief Society--"Try the Spirits"--The Prophet's Editorial.

_Monday, March 21, 1842_.--I commenced a settlement with William Marks,
who had loaned money and property to the Church at various times.

_Tuesday, 22_.--I was at the general business office through the day,
and at home in the evening.

The following is from the _Advocate_, printed at Columbus, the
residence of Grand Master [i. e. grand master mason] Jonas:

    Nauvoo and the Mormons.

    Mr. Editor.--Having recently had occasion to visit the city of
    Nauvoo, I cannot permit the opportunity to pass without expressing
    the agreeable disappointment that awaited me there. I had
    supposed, from what I had previously heard, that I should witness
    an impoverished, ignorant and bigotted population, completely
    priest-ridden, and tyrannized over by Joseph Smith, the great
    prophet of these people.

    On the contrary, to my surprise, I saw a people apparently happy,
    prosperous and intelligent. Every man appeared to be employed in
    some business or occupation. I saw no idleness, no intemperance,
    no noise, no riot--all appeared to be contented, with no desire to
    trouble themselves with anything except their own affairs. With
    the religion of these people I have nothing to do; if they can be
    satisfied with the doctrines of their new revelation, they have a
    right to be so. The Constitution of the country guarantees to them
    the right of worshiping God according to the dictates of their own
    conscience, and if that can be so easily satisfied, why should we
    who differ from them complain?

    But I protest against the slanders and persecutions that are
    continually heaped upon these people. I could see no disposition on
    their part to be otherwise than a peaceable and law-abiding people,
    and all they ask of the country is to permit them to live under the
    protection of the {566} laws, and to be made amenable for their
    violations. They may have among them bad and desperate characters,
    and what community has not? But I am satisfied the Mormon people,
    as a body, will never be the aggressors or violators of the law.

    While at Nauvoo I had a fine opportunity of seeing the people in
    a body. There was a Masonic celebration, and the Grand Master of
    the state was present for the purpose of publicly installing the
    officers of a new lodge. An immense number of persons assembled
    on the occasion, variously estimated from five to ten thousand
    persons, and never in my life did I witness a better-dressed or
    a more orderly and well-behaved assemblage; not a drunken or
    disorderly person to be seen, and the display of taste and beauty
    among the females could not well be surpassed anywhere.

    During my stay of three days, I became well acquainted with
    their principal men, and more particularly with their Prophet,
    the celebrated "Old Joe Smith." I found them hospitable, polite,
    well-informed and liberal. With Joseph Smith, the hospitality of
    whose house I kindly received, I was well pleased; of course on
    the subject of religion, we widely differed, but he appeared to
    be quite as willing to permit me to enjoy my right of opinion,
    as I think we all ought to be to let the Mormons enjoy theirs;
    but instead of the ignorant and tyrannical upstart, judge my
    surprise at finding him a sensible, intelligent, companionable and
    gentlemanly man. In frequent conversations with him he gave me
    every information that I desired, and appeared to be only pleased
    at being able to do so. He appears to be much respected by all the
    people about him, and has their entire confidence. He is a fine
    looking man about thirty-six years of age, and has an interesting
    family.

    The incorporated limits of Nauvoo contains, it is said, about
    seven thousand persons; the buildings are generally small and
    much scattered. The Temple and Nauvoo House, now building, will
    probably, in beauty of design, extent and durability, excel any
    public building in the state, and will both be enclosed before
    winter.

    From all I saw and heard, I am led to believe that, before many
    years, the city of Nauvoo will be the largest and most beautiful
    city of the west, provided the Mormons are unmolested in the
    peaceable enjoyment of their rights and privileges, and why
    they should be troubled while acting as good citizens, I cannot
    imagine; and I hope and trust that the people of Illinois have no
    disposition to disturb unoffending people who have no disposition
    but to live peaceably under the laws of the country, and to worship
    God under their own vine and fig tree.--An Observer, Adams County.

    _Extract from a Letter from Elder E. P. Maginn, Salem,
    Massachusetts_.

    I am on a visit to assist Elder Erastus Snow in his successful
    and {567} extended field of labor in this branch. Sixty-five have
    been obedient to the faith of the Gospel, and hundreds of others
    almost persuaded. In Boston near forty have obeyed through the
    faithful labors of Elder Freeman Nickerson. I have been absent
    from Peterborough two weeks; have preached three or four times in
    Boston, Salem, Marblehead, Chelsea, &c., and purpose returning to
    Peterborough next Sunday, where I have been laboring with good
    success, thirty-six have obeyed since last fall; at New Salem,
    Massachusetts, thirty-five to forty have obeyed since August last;
    Leverett, eighteen or twenty; Gilsum, New Hampshire, twenty to
    thirty. I have preached from one to three times every day, and
    cannot fill one in twenty of the calls for preaching; there is the
    greatest excitement in this country that I ever beheld during my
    travels since I left Nauvoo--a period of near three years, in which
    I have traveled through eighteen states and British provinces.

_Wednesday, 23_.--In council with Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards
and others at my office.

[Sidenote: Organization of the Relief Society.]

_Thursday, 24_.--I attended by request, the Female Relief Society,
whose object is the relief of the poor, the destitute, the widow
and the orphan, and for the exercise of all benevolent purposes.
Its organization was completed this day. Mrs. Emma Smith takes the
presidential chair; Mrs. Elizabeth Ann Whitney and Sarah M. Cleveland
are her counselors; Mrs. Elvira Cole is treasurer, and our well-known
and talented poetess, Miss Eliza R. Snow, secretary. There was a
very numerous attendance at the organization of the society, and
also at the subsequent meetings, of some of our most intelligent,
humane, philanthropic and respectable ladies; and we are well assured
from a knowledge of those pure principles of benevolence that flow
spontaneously from their humane and philanthropic bosoms, that with the
resources they will have at command, they will fly to the relief of
the stranger; they will pour in oil and wine to the wounded heart of
the distressed; they will dry up the tears of the orphan and make the
widow's heart to rejoice.

[Sidenote: Character of the Mormon Women.]

Our women have always been signalized for their acts of benevolence
and kindness; but the cruel usage that they {568} received from the
barbarians of Missouri, has hitherto prevented their extending the
hand of charity in a conspicuous manner; yet in the midst of their
persecution, when the bread has been torn from their helpless offspring
by their cruel oppressors, they have always been ready to open their
doors to the weary traveler, to divide their scant pittance with the
hungry, and from their robbed and impoverished wardrobes, to divide
with the more needy and destitute; and now that they are living upon
a more genial soil, and among a less barbarous people, and possess
facilities that they have not heretofore enjoyed, we feel convinced
that with their concentrated efforts, the condition of the suffering
poor, of the stranger and the fatherless will be ameliorated.

We had the privilege of being present at their organization, and were
much pleased with their _modus operandi_, and the good order that
prevailed. They are strictly parliamentary in their proceedings.

An earthquake at Falmouth this morning.

_Friday, 25_.--Attending to a variety of business; counseling, &c.

[Sidenote: Mission of John Snyder.]

_Saturday, 26_.--Elder John Snyder received his final instructions from
the President, and received his blessing from Elder Brigham Young, with
the laying on of the hands of President Joseph Smith, John E. Page and
Willard Richards, and started for England this day.

_Sunday, 27_.--After speaking to the Saints for some time on the
subject of baptism for the dead, I baptized one hundred and seven
individuals.

    [The following brief extract is from Elder Woodruff's journal.]

    _Synopsis of the Prophet's Sermon on Baptism for the Dead_.

    This was an interesting day. A large assembly met in the grove near
    the Temple. Brother Amasa Lyman addressed the people in a very
    {569} interesting manner. He was followed by Joseph, the Seer,
    who made some highly edifying and instructive remarks concerning
    baptism for the dead. He said the Bible supported the doctrine,
    quoting 1 Cor., xv: 29: "Else what shall they do which are baptized
    for the dead, if the dead rise not at all, why are they then
    baptized for the dead?" If there is one word of the Lord that
    supports the doctrine of baptism for the dead, it is enough to
    establish it as a true doctrine. Again; if we can, by the authority
    of the Priesthood of the Son of God, baptize a man in the name of
    the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, for the remission of
    sins, it is just as much our privilege to act as an agent, and be
    baptized for the remission of sins for and in behalf of our dead
    kindred, who have not heard the Gospel, or the fullness of it.

    After meeting closed, the congregation again assembled upon the
    banks of the river, and Joseph, the Seer, went into the river, and
    baptized all that came unto him.

I also witnessed the landing of 170 English brethren from the steamer
_Ariel_, under the presidency of Elder Lyman Wight; also about $3,000
worth of goods for the Temple and Nauvoo House.

_Monday, 28_.--I was at the office. Received Parley P. Pratt's
donations from England, and attended to a variety of business; as also
on the 29th and 30th.

The following extract is from a letter received from Elder Lorenzo D.
Barnes--

    Bristol, March 28, 1842.

    _Letter of Lorenzo D. Barnes to Parley P. Pratt--Reporting Labors_.

    _Elder Pratt_.

    Much Esteemed Brother:--I am happy to be able to state to you
    that I arrived here in safety and in health on Saturday, the 26th
    instant, after making a tour through a number of churches on my
    way from Cheltenham, which place I left in the evening of the
    14th; visited the church at Lea; in the neighborhood of which I
    preached twice. I then went to Garway, where I preached five times
    to overflowing congregations; from thence visited Abergavenny, and
    preached three times. The work appears to be upon the onward march
    in all these places. Many are inquiring after truth and embracing
    it. The brethren and friends appeared very anxious for me to tarry
    longer, but being desirous to commence my labors in this city, I
    took my leave on Saturday, the 26th, and came _via_ Newport, by
    the packet to this city, and preached {570} three times yesterday.
    There appears to be a good feeling manifested here at present.
    In the evening our hall was quite full, and the people listened
    very attentively; persons of respectable appearance were present.
    We intend getting a large hall, and putting out bills shortly.
    Enclosed is an order for ten shillings, it being a donation for the
    building of the Temple at Nauvoo, mostly from the branch of the
    Church at Frogmarsh.

    Yours in the bonds of the new covenant,

    Lorenzo D. Barnes.

_Wednesday, 30_.--I met with the Female Relief Society, and gave them
some instructions, of which the following brief sketch was reported by
Miss Eliza R. Snow--

    _Synopsis of the Prophet's Remarks to the Female Relief Society_.

    President Joseph Smith arose. Spoke of the organization of the
    Female Relief Society; said he was deeply interested, that it
    might be built up to the Most High in an acceptable manner; that
    its rules must be observed; that none should be received into
    it but those who were worthy; proposed a close examination of
    every candidate; that the society was growing too fast. It should
    grow up by degrees, should commence with a few individuals, thus
    have a select society of the virtuous, and those who would walk
    circumspectly; commended them for their zeal, but said sometimes
    their zeal was not according to knowledge. One principal object
    of the institution was to purge out iniquity; said they must be
    extremely careful in all their examinations, or the consequences
    would be serious.

    All difficulties which might and would cross our way must be
    surmounted. Though the soul be tried, the heart faint, and the
    hands hang down, we must not retrace our steps; there must be
    decision of character, aside from sympathy. When instructed, we
    must obey that voice, deserve the laws of the kingdom of God, that
    the blessing of heaven may rest down upon us. All must act in
    concert, or nothing can be done, and should move according to the
    ancient Priesthood; hence the Saints should be a select people,
    separate from all the evils of the world--choice, virtuous, and
    holy. The Lord was going to make of the Church of Jesus Christ
    a kingdom of Priests, a holy people, a chosen generation, as in
    Enoch's day, having all the gifts as illustrated to the Church in
    Paul's epistles and teachings to the churches in his day--that it
    is the privilege of each member to live long and enjoy health. He
    then blessed the Saints.

_Monday, 31_.--In council at my office with Elders {571} Brigham Young,
John Taylor, Willard Richards, &c., and wrote an epistle to the Female
Relief Society, and spoke to the society in the afternoon.

_Friday, April 1, 1842_.--I was engaged in the general business office.

    "_Try the Spirits"--The Prophet's Editorial in the Times and
    Seasons_.

    Recent occurrences that have transpired amongst us render it an
    imperative duty devolving upon me to say something in relation to
    the spirits by which men are actuated.

    It is evident from the Apostles' writings, that many false spirits
    existed in their day, and had "gone forth into the world," and
    that it needed intelligence which God alone could impart to detect
    false spirits, and to prove what spirits were of God. The world in
    general have been grossly ignorant in regard to this one thing, and
    why should they be otherwise--"for no man knows the things of God,
    but by the Spirit of God."

    The Egyptians were not able to discover the difference between the
    miracles of Moses and those of the magicians until they came to
    be tested together; and if Moses had not appeared in their midst,
    they would unquestionably have thought that the miracles of the
    magicians were performed through the mighty power of God, for they
    were great miracles that were performed by them--a supernatural
    agency was developed, and great power manifested.

    The witch of Endor is a no less singular personage; clothed with a
    powerful agency she raised the Prophet Samuel from his grave, and
    he appeared before the astonished king, and revealed unto him his
    future destiny. Who is to tell whether this woman is of God, and
    a righteous woman--or whether the power she possessed was of the
    devil, and she a witch as represented by the Bible? It is easy for
    us to say now, but if we had lived in her day, which of us could
    have unravelled the mystery?

    It would have been equally as difficult for us to tell by what
    spirit the Apostles prophesied, or by what power the Apostles spoke
    and worked miracles. Who could have told whether the power of
    Simon, the sorcerer, was of God or of the devil?

    There always did, in every age, seem to be a lack of intelligence
    pertaining to this subject. Spirits of all kinds have been
    manifested, in every age, and almost amongst all people. If we go
    among the pagans, they have their spirits; the Mohammedans, the
    Jews, the Christians, the Indians--all have their spirits, all have
    a supernatural agency, and all contend that their spirits are of
    God. Who shall solve the mystery? "Try the spirits," says John, but
    who is to do it? The learned, the {572} eloquent, the philosopher,
    the sage, the divine--all are ignorant. The heathens will boast
    of their gods, and of the great things that have been unfolded by
    their oracles. The Mussulman will boast of his Koran, and of the
    divine communications that his progenitors have received. The Jews
    have had numerous instances, both ancient and modern, among them
    of men who have professed to be inspired, and sent to bring about
    great events, and the Christian world has not been slow in making
    up the number.

    "Try the spirits," but what by? Are we to try them by the creeds of
    men? What preposterous folly--what sheer ignorance--what madness!
    Try the motions and actions of an eternal being (for I contend that
    all spirits are such) by a thing that was conceived in ignorance,
    and brought forth in folly--a cobweb of yesterday! Angels would
    hide their faces, and devils would be ashamed and insulted, and
    would say, "Paul we know, and Jesus we know, but who are ye?" Let
    each man of society make a creed and try evil spirits by it, and
    the devil would shake his sides; it is all that he would ask--all
    that he would desire. Yet many of them do this, and hence "many
    spirits are abroad in the world."

    One great evil is, that men are ignorant of the nature of
    spirits; their power, laws, government, intelligence, &c., and
    imagine that when there is anything like power, revelation, or
    vision manifested, that it must be of God. Hence the Methodists,
    Presbyterians, and others frequently possess a spirit that will
    cause them to lie down, and during its operation, animation is
    frequently entirely suspended; they consider it to be the power
    of God, and a glorious manifestation from God--a manifestation of
    what? Is there any intelligence communicated? Are the curtains
    of heaven withdrawn, or the purposes of God developed? Have they
    seen and conversed with an angel--or have the glories of futurity
    burst upon their view? No! but their body has been inanimate, the
    operation of their spirit suspended, and all the intelligence that
    can be obtained from them when they arise, is a shout of "glory,"
    or "hallelujah," or some incoherent expression; but they have had
    "the power."

    The Shaker will whirl around on his heel, impelled by a
    supernatural agency or spirit, and think that he is governed by the
    Spirit of God; and the Jumper will jump and enter into all kinds of
    extravagances. A Primitive Methodist will shout under the influence
    of that spirit, until he will rend the heavens with his cries;
    while the Quakers (or Friends) moved as they think, by the Spirit
    of God, will sit still and say nothing. Is God the author of all
    this? If not of all of it, which does He recognize? Surely, such a
    heterogeneous mass of confusion never can enter into the kingdom of
    heaven.

    {573} Every one of these professes to be competent to try his
    neighbor's spirit, but no one can try his own, and what is the
    reason? Because they have not a key to unlock, no rule wherewith
    to measure, and no criterion whereby they can test it. Could any
    one tell the length, breadth or height of a building without a
    rule? test the quality of metals without a criterion, or point
    out the movements of the planetary systems, without a knowledge
    of astronomy? Certainly not; and if such ignorance as this is
    manifested about a spirit of this kind, who can describe an angel
    of light? If Satan should appear as one in glory, who can tell his
    color, his signs, his appearance, his glory?--or what is the manner
    of his manifestation? Who can detect the spirit of the French
    prophets with their revelations and their visions, and power of
    manifestations? Or who can point out the spirit of the Irvingites,
    with their apostles and prophets, and visions and tongues, and
    interpretations, &c., &c. Or who can drag into daylight and develop
    the hidden mysteries of the false spirits that so frequently are
    made manifest among the Latter-day Saints? We answer that no man
    can do this without the Priesthood, and having a knowledge of
    the laws by which spirits are governed; for as "no man knows the
    things of God, but by the Spirit of God," so no man knows the
    spirit of the devil, and his power and influence, but by possessing
    intelligence which is more than human, and having unfolded through
    the medium of the Priesthood the mysterious operations of his
    devices; without knowing the angelic form, the sanctified look and
    gesture, and the zeal that is frequently manifested by him for the
    glory of God, together with the prophetic spirit, the gracious
    influence, the godly appearance, and the holy garb, which are so
    characteristic of his proceedings and his mysterious windings.

    A man must have the discerning of spirits before he can drag into
    daylight this hellish influence and unfold it unto the world in all
    its soul-destroying, diabolical, and horrid colors; for nothing
    is a greater injury to the children of men than to be under the
    influence of a false spirit when they think they have the Spirit of
    God. Thousands have felt the influence of its terrible power and
    baneful effects. Long pilgrimages have been undertaken, penances
    endured, and pain, misery and ruin have followed in their train;
    nations have been convulsed, kingdoms overthrown, provinces laid
    waste, and blood, carnage and desolation are habiliments in which
    it has been clothed.

    The Turks, the Hindoos, the Jews, the Christians, the Indian; in
    fact all nations have been deceived, imposed upon and injured
    through the mischievous effects of false spirits.

    As we have noticed before, the great difficulty lies in the
    ignorance of the nature of spirits, of the laws by which they are
    governed, and the signs by which they may be known; if it requires
    the Spirit of God {574} to know the things of God; and the spirit
    of the devil can only be unmasked through that medium, then it
    follows as a natural consequence that unless some person or persons
    have a communication, or revelation from God, unfolding to them the
    operation of the spirit, they must eternally remain ignorant of
    these principles; for I contend that if one man cannot understand
    these things but by the Spirit of God, ten thousand men cannot; it
    is alike out of the reach of the wisdom of the learned, the tongue
    of the eloquent, the power of the mighty. And we shall at last have
    to come to this conclusion, whatever we may think of revelation,
    that without it we can neither know nor understand anything of God,
    or the devil; and however unwilling the world may be to acknowledge
    this principle, it is evident from the multifarious creeds and
    notions concerning this matter that they understand nothing of
    this principle, and it is equally as plain that without a divine
    communication they must remain in ignorance. The world always
    mistook false prophets for true ones, and those that were sent of
    God, they considered to be false prophets, and hence they killed,
    stoned, punished and imprisoned the true prophets, and these had
    to hide themselves "in deserts and dens, and caves of the earth,"
    and though the most honorable men of the earth, they banished them
    from their society as vagabonds, whilst they cherished, honored and
    supported knaves, vagabonds, hypocrites, impostors, and the basest
    of men.

    A man must have the discerning of spirits, as we before stated,
    to understand these things, and how is he to obtain this gift
    if there are no gifts of the Spirit? And how can these gifts be
    obtained without revelation? Christ ascended into heaven, and
    gave gifts to men; and He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets,
    and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. And how were
    Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers and Evangelists chosen? By
    prophecy (revelation) and by laying on of hands:--by a divine
    communication, and a divinely appointed ordinance--through the
    medium of the Priesthood, organized according to the order of God,
    by divine appointment. The Apostles in ancient times held the
    keys of this Priesthood--of the mysteries of the kingdom of God,
    and consequently were enabled to unlock and unravel all things
    pertaining to the government of the Church, the welfare of society,
    the future destiny of men, and the agency, power and influence of
    spirits; for they could control them at pleasure, bid them depart
    in the name of Jesus, and detect their mischievous and mysterious
    operations when trying to palm themselves upon the Church in a
    religious garb, and militate against the interest of the Church and
    spread of truth. We read that they "cast out devils in the name of
    Jesus," and when a woman possessing the spirit of divination, cried
    before Paul and Silas, "these are the servants of the Most High God
    that show unto us the way of salvation," they detected the {575}
    spirit. And although she spake favorably of them, Paul commanded
    the spirit to come out of her, and saved themselves from the
    opprobrium that might have been heaped upon their heads, through
    an alliance with her, in the development of her wicked principles,
    which they certainly would have been charged with, if they had not
    rebuked the evil spirit.

    A power similar to this existed through the medium of the
    Priesthood in different ages. Moses could detect the magician's
    power, and show that he [himself] was God's servant--he knew when
    he was upon the mountain (through revelation) that Israel was
    engaged in idolatry; he could develop the sin of Korah, Dathan and
    Abiram, detect witches and wizards in their proceedings, and point
    out the true prophets of the Lord. Joshua knew how to detect the
    man who had stolen the wedge of gold and the Babylonish garment.
    Michaiah could point out the false spirit by which the four hundred
    prophets were governed; and if his advice had been taken, many
    lives would have been spared, (II Chronicles xviii) Elijah, Elisha,
    Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and many other prophets possessed this
    power. Our Savior, the Apostles, and even the members of the
    Church were endowed with this gift, for, says Paul, (I Corinthians
    xii), "To one is given the gift of tongues, to another the
    interpretation of tongues, to another the working of miracles, to
    another prophecy, to another the discerning of spirits." All these
    proceeded from the same Spirit of God, and were the gifts of God.
    The Ephesian church were enabled by this principle, "to try those
    that said they were apostles, and were not, and found them liars,"
    (Revelation ii: 2.)

    In tracing the thing to the foundation, and looking at it
    philosophically, we shall find a very material difference between
    the body and the spirit; the body is supposed to be organized
    matter, and the spirit, by many, is thought to be immaterial,
    without substance. With this latter statement we should beg leave
    to differ, and state that spirit is a substance; that it is
    material, but that it is more pure, elastic and refined matter
    than the body; that it existed before the body, can exist in the
    body; and will exist separate from the body, when the body will
    be mouldering in the dust; and will in the resurrection, be again
    united with it.

    Without attempting to describe this mysterious connection, and
    the laws that govern the body and the spirit of man, their
    relationship to each other, and the design of God in relation to
    the human body and spirit, I would just remark, that the spirits
    of men are eternal, that they are governed by the same Priesthood
    that Abraham, Melchizedek, and the Apostles were: that they are
    organized according to that Priesthood which is everlasting,
    "without beginning of days or end of years,"--that they all move in
    their respective spheres, and are governed by the law of God; that
    when they appear upon the earth they are in a {576} probationary
    state, and are preparing, if righteous, for a future and greater
    glory; that the spirits of good men cannot interfere with the
    wicked beyond their prescribed bounds, for Michael, the Archangel,
    dared not bring a railing accusation against the devil, but said,
    "The Lord rebuke thee, Satan."

    It would seem also, that wicked spirits have their bounds, limits,
    and laws by which they are governed or controlled, and know their
    future destiny; hence, those that were in the maniac said to our
    Savior, "Art thou come to torment us before the time," and when
    Satan presented himself before the Lord, among the sons of God, he
    said that he came "from going to and fro in the earth, and from
    wandering up and down in it;" and he is emphatically called the
    prince of the power of the air; and, it is very evident that they
    possess a power that none but those who have the Priesthood can
    control, as we have before adverted to, in the case of the sons of
    Sceva.

    Having said so much upon general principles, without referring to
    the peculiar situation, power, and influence of the magicians of
    Egypt, the wizards and witches of the Jews, the oracles of the
    heathen, their necromancers, soothsayers, and astrologers, the
    maniacs or those possessed of devils in the Apostles' days, we will
    notice, and try to detect (so far as we have the Scriptures for our
    aid) some few instances of the development of false spirits in more
    modern times, and in this our day.

    The "French Prophets" were possessed of a spirit that deceived;
    they existed in Vivaris and Dauphany, in great numbers in the year
    1688; there were many boys and girls from seven to twenty-five;
    they had strange fits, as in tremblings and faintings, which made
    them stretch out their legs and arms, as in a swoon; they remained
    awhile in trances, and coming out of them, uttered all that came in
    their mouths [see Buck's Theological Dictionary].

    Now God never had any prophets that acted in this way; there was
    nothing indecorous in the proceeding of the Lord's prophets in any
    age; neither had the apostles, nor prophets in the apostles's day
    anything of this kind. Paul says, "Ye may all prophesy, one by
    one; and if anything be revealed to another let the first hold his
    peace, for the spirit of the prophets is subject to the prophets;"
    but here we find that the prophets are subject to the spirit, and
    falling down, have twitchings, tumblings, and faintings through the
    influence of that spirit, being entirely under its control. Paul
    says, "Let everything be done decently and in order," but here we
    find the greatest disorder and indecency in the conduct of both men
    and women, as above described. The same rule would apply to the
    fallings, twitchings, swoonings, shaking, and trances of many of
    our modern revivalists.

    {577} Johanna Southcott professed to be a prophetess, and wrote a
    book of prophecies in 1804, she became the founder of a people that
    are still extant. She was to bring forth, in a place appointed,
    a son, that was to be the Messiah, which thing has failed.
    Independent of this, however, where do we read of a woman that was
    the founder of a church, in the word of God? Paul told the women in
    his day, "To keep silence in the church, and that if they wished to
    know anything to ask their husbands at home;" he would not suffer a
    woman "to rule, or to usurp authority in the church;" but here we
    find a woman the founder of a church, the revelator and guide, the
    Alpha and Omega, contrary to all acknowledged rule, principle, and
    order.

    Jemimah Wilkinson was another prophetess that figured largely
    in America, in the last century. She stated that she was taken
    sick and died, and that her soul went to heaven, where it still
    continues. Soon after, her body was reanimated with the spirit and
    power of Christ, upon which she set up as a public teacher, and
    declared that she had an immediate revelation. Now the Scriptures
    positively assert that "Christ is the first fruit, afterwards
    those that are Christ's at His coming, then cometh the end." But
    Jemimah, according to her testimony, died, and rose again before
    the time mentioned in the Scriptures. The idea of her soul being in
    heaven while her body was [living] on earth, is also preposterous.
    When God breathed into man's nostrils, he became a living soul,
    before that he did not live, and when that was taken away his body
    died; and so did our Savior when the spirit left the body, nor
    did His body live until His spirit returned in the power of His
    resurrection. But Mrs. Wilkinson's soul [life] was in heaven, and
    her body without the soul [or life] on earth, living [without the
    soul, or] without life!

    The Irvingites, are a people that have counterfeited the truth,
    perhaps the nearest of any of our modern sectarians. They commenced
    about ten years ago in the city of London, in England; they have
    churches formed in various parts of England and Scotland, and some
    few in Upper Canada. Mr. Irving, their founder, was a learned
    and talented minister of the Church of Scotland, he was a great
    logician, and a powerful orator, but withal wild and enthusiastic
    in his views. Moving in the higher circles, and possessing talent
    and zeal, placed him in a situation to become a conspicuous
    character, and to raise up a society similar to that which is
    called after his name.

    The Irvingites have apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers,
    evangelists, and angels. They profess to have the gift of tongues,
    and the interpretation of tongues, and, in some few instances, to
    have the gift of healing.

    The first prophetic spirit that was manifested was in some Misses
    {578} Campbell that Mr. Irving met with, while on a journey in
    Scotland; they had [what is termed among their sect] "utterances,"
    which were evidently of a supernatural agency. Mr. Irving,
    falling into the common error of considering all supernatural
    manifestations to be of God, took them to London with him, and
    introduced them into his church.

    They were there honored as the prophetesses of God, and when they
    spoke, Mr. Irving or any of his ministers had to keep silence.
    They were peculiarly wrought upon before the congregation, and
    had strange utterances, uttered with an unnatural, shrill voice,
    and with thrilling intonations they frequently made use of a few
    broken, unconnected sentences, that were ambiguous, incoherent, and
    incomprehensible; at other times they were more clearly understood.
    They would frequently cry out, "There is iniquity! There is
    iniquity!" And Mr. Irving has been led, under the influence of this
    charge, to fall down upon his knees before the public congregation,
    and to confess his sin, not knowing whether he had sinned, nor
    wherein, nor whether the thing referred to him, or somebody else.
    During these operations, the bodies of the persons speaking were
    powerfully wrought upon, their countenances were distorted, they
    had frequent twitchings in their hands, and the whole system was
    powerfully convulsed at intervals: they sometimes, however, (it is
    supposed) spoke in correct tongues, and had true interpretations.

    Under the influence of this spirit the church was organized by
    these women; apostles, prophets, &c. were soon called, and a
    systematic order of things introduced, as above mentioned. A Mr.
    Baxter (afterwards one of their principal prophets) upon going
    into one of their meetings, says, "I saw a power manifested, and
    thought that was the power of God, and asked that it might fall
    upon me, and it did so, and I began to prophesy." Eight or nine
    years ago they had about sixty preachers going through the streets
    of London, testifying that London was to be the place where the
    "two witnesses" spoken of by John, were to prophesy; that (they)
    "the church and the spirit were the witnesses, and that at the
    end of three years and a half there was to be an earthquake and
    great destruction, and our Savior was to come. Their apostles were
    collected together at the appointed time watching the event, but
    Jesus did not come, and the prophecy was then ambiguously explained
    away. They frequently had signs given them by the spirit to prove
    to them that what was manifested to them should take place. Mr.
    Baxter related an impression that he had concerning a child. It was
    manifested to him that he should visit the child, and lay hands
    upon it, and that it should be healed; and to prove to him that
    this was of God, he should meet his brother in a certain place,
    who should speak unto him certain words. His brother addressed
    him precisely in the way {579} and manner that the manifestation
    designated. The sign took place, but when he laid his hands upon
    the child it did not recover. I cannot vouch for the authority
    of the last statement, as Mr. Baxter at that time had left the
    Irvingites, but it is in accordance with many of their proceedings,
    and the thing never has been attempted to be denied."

    It may be asked, where is there anything in all this that is wrong?

    1st. The church was organized by women, and God placed in the
    Church (first apostles, secondarily prophets), and not first women;
    but Mr. Irving placed in his church first women (secondarily
    apostles), and the church was founded and organized by them. A
    woman has no right to found or organize a church--God never sent
    them to do it.

    2nd. Those women would speak in the midst of a meeting, and rebuke
    Mr. Irving or any of the church. Now the Scripture positively says,
    "Thou shalt not rebuke an Elder, but entreat him as a father:" not
    only this, but they frequently accused the brethren, thus placing
    themselves in the seat of Satan, who is emphatically called "the
    accuser of the brethren."

    3rd. Mr. Baxter received the spirit on asking for it, without
    attending to the ordinances, and began to prophesy, whereas the
    scriptural way of attaining the gift of the Holy Ghost is by
    baptism, and by laying on of hands.

    4th. As we have stated in regard to others, the spirit of the
    prophets is subject to the prophets; but those prophets were
    subject to the spirits, the spirits controlling their bodies at
    pleasure.

    But it may be asked how Mr. Baxter could get a sign from a second
    person? To this we would answer, that Mr. Baxter's brother was
    under the influence of the same spirit as himself, and being
    subject to that spirit he could be easily made to speak to Mr.
    Baxter whatever the spirit should dictate; but there was not power
    in the spirit to heal the child.

    Again it may be asked, how it was that they could speak in tongues
    if they were of the devil! We would answer that they could be made
    to speak in another tongue, as well as their own, as they were
    under the control of that spirit, and the devil can tempt the
    Hottentot, the Turk, the Jew, or any other nation; and if these men
    were under the influence of his spirit, they of course could speak
    Hebrew, Latin, Greek, Italian, Dutch, or any other language that
    the devil knew.

    Some will say, "try the spirits" by the word. "Every spirit that
    confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God, and
    every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the
    flesh is not of God." John 4: 2, 3. One of the Irvingites once
    quoted this passage whilst under the influence of a spirit, and
    then said, "I confess that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh." And
    yet these prophecies failed, {580} their Messiah did not come; and
    the great things spoken of by them have fallen to the ground. What
    is the matter here? Did not the Apostle speak the truth? Certainly
    he did--but he spoke to a people who were under the penalty of
    death, the moment they embraced Christianity; and no one without
    a knowledge of the fact would confess it, and expose themselves
    to death, and this was consequently given as a criterion to the
    church or churches to which John wrote. But the devil on a certain
    occasion cried out, "I know thee, who thou art, the Holy One of
    God!" Here was a frank acknowledgment under other circumstances
    that "Jesus had come in the flesh." On another occasion the devil
    said, "Paul we know, and Jesus we know"--of course, "come in the
    flesh." No man nor set of men without the regular constituted
    authorities, the Priesthood and discerning of spirits, can tell
    true from false spirits. This power they possessed in the Apostles'
    day, but it has departed from the world for ages.

    The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has also had its
    false spirits; and as it is made up of all those different sects
    professing every variety of opinion, and having been under the
    influence of so many kinds of spirits, it is not to be wondered at
    if there should be found among us false spirits.

    Soon after the Gospel was established in Kirtland, and during the
    absence of the authorities of the Church, many false spirits were
    introduced, many strange visions were seen, and wild, enthusiastic
    notions were entertained; men ran out of doors under the influence
    of this spirit, and some of them got upon the stumps of trees and
    shouted, and all kinds of extravagances were entered into by them;
    one man pursued a ball that he said he saw flying in the air, until
    he came to a precipice, when he jumped into the top of a tree,
    which saved his life; and many ridiculous things were entered into,
    calculated to bring disgrace upon the Church of God, to cause the
    Spirit of God to be withdrawn, and to uproot and destroy those
    glorious principles which had been developed for the salvation of
    the human family. But when the authorities returned, the spirit was
    made manifest, those members that were exercised with it were tried
    for their fellowship, and those that would not repent and forsake
    it were cut off.

    At a subsequent period a Shaker spirit was on the point of being
    introduced, and at another time the Methodist and Presbyterian
    falling down power, but the spirit was rebuked and put down,
    and those who would not submit to rule and good order were
    disfellowshiped. We have also had brethren and sisters who have
    had the gift of tongues falsely; they would speak in a muttering
    unnatural voice, and their bodies be distorted like the Irvingites
    before alluded to; whereas, there is nothing unnatural in the
    Spirit of God. A circumstance of this kind {581} took place in
    Upper Canada, but was rebuked by the presiding Elder; another, a
    woman near the same place, professed to have the discerning of
    spirits, and began to _accuse_ another sister of things that she
    was not guilty of, which she said she knew was so by the spirit,
    but was afterwards proven to be false; she placed herself in the
    capacity of the "_accuser_ of the brethren," and no person through
    the discerning of spirits can bring a charge against another, they
    must be proven guilty by positive evidence, or they stand clear.

    There have also been ministering angels in the Church which were
    of Satan appearing as an angel of light. A sister in the state
    of New York had a vision, who said it was told her that if she
    would go to a certain place in the woods, an angel would appear to
    her. She went at the appointed time, and saw a glorious personage
    descending, arrayed in white, with sandy colored hair; he commenced
    and told her to fear God, and said that her husband was called to
    do great things, but that he must not go more than one hundred
    miles from home, or he would not return; whereas God had called him
    to go to the ends of the earth, and he has since been more than one
    thousand miles from home, and is yet alive. Many true things were
    spoken by this personage, and many things that were false. How, it
    may be asked, was this known to be a bad angel? By the color of his
    hair; that is one of the signs that he can be known by, and by his
    contradicting a former revelation.

    We have also had brethren and sisters who have written revelations,
    and who have started forward to lead this Church. Such was a young
    boy in Kirtland, Isaac Russel, of Missouri, and Gladden Bishop, and
    Oliver Olney of Nauvoo. The boy is now living with his parents who
    have submitted to the laws of the Church. Mr. Russell stayed in Far
    West, from whence he was to go to the Rocky Mountains, led by three
    Nephites; but the Nephites never came, and his friends forsook him,
    all but some of the blood relations, who have since been nearly
    destroyed by the mob. Mr. Bishop was tried by the High Council, his
    papers examined, condemned and burned, and he cut off the Church.
    He acknowledged the justice of the decision, and said "that he now
    saw his error, for if he had been governed by the revelations given
    before, he might have known that no man was to write revelations
    for the Church, but Joseph Smith," and begged to be prayed for, and
    forgiven by the brethren. Mr. Olney has also been tried by the High
    Council and disfellowshiped, because he would not have his writings
    tested by the word of God; evidently proving that he loves darkness
    rather than light, because his deeds are evil.

{582}



CHAPTER XXXIV.

Special Conference of the Church at Nauvoo--The Prophet's Reproof of
the Wicked--Epistle of the Twelve to the Saints in Kirtland--Status of
the Church.

_Saturday, April 2_.--I paid Hugh Rhodes $1,150 for a farm.

The fourth regiment of the second cohort of the Nauvoo Legion,
consisting of four companies, was organized, Jonathan Dunham was
elected colonel, James Brown, lieutenant-colonel, and Jesse P. Harmon,
major of the same.

_Monday, 4_.--Transacted business at my house with Josiah Butterfield,
concerning the Lawrence estates; and closed a settlement with William
Marks in the counting room, and paid him off, principal and interest to
the last farthing, for all that myself or the Church had had of him.

_Tuesday, 5_.--Settled with Brother Niswanger.

[Sidenote: The Thirteenth Anniversary of the Organization of the
Church.]

_Wednesday, 6_.--The first day of the thirteenth year of the rise of
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. A special conference
had been appointed at the city of Nauvoo, but it was so wet and cold,
that it was not prudent for me to go out, as my health was not good,
and I spent the day with my family. Brother Hyrum and Elders Brigham
Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Willard Richards called on me in the
morning, and I gave them instructions how to organize and adjourn the
conference. Before they left, Brother Hyrum and the Twelve present bore
testimony {583} that they had never heard me teach any principles but
those of the strictest virtue, either in public or private.

    Conference Minutes.

    _Special Conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
    Saints_.

    _City of Nauvoo, April 6, 1842_.

    The day being wet, the First Presidency did not attend, and Elder
    Page addressed those present upon the subject of the charges
    against him, and said he "would be happy to have an opportunity
    of laying his statement before the conference at a convenient
    time. President William Law, General Bennett, president _pro tem_,
    and President Hyrum Smith all spoke upon the subject of military
    affairs, showing the necessity of a well organized and efficient
    force; that as we were bound to serve our country, if required, in
    common with all good citizens, we ought not to be behind any of our
    neighbors in point of good order, neat uniforms and equipments, and
    a well organized and thoroughly disciplined legion."

    _Thursday, April 7_.--Conference met. President Joseph Smith had
    the several quorums put in order and seated. He then made some
    very appropriate remarks concerning the duties of the Church, the
    necessity of unity of purpose in regard to the building of the
    houses, and the blessings connected with doing the will of God,
    and the inconsistency, folly, and danger of murmuring against the
    dispensations of Jehovah.

    He said that the principal object of the meeting was, to bring the
    case of Elder Page before them; and that another object was, to
    choose young men and ordain them, and send them out to preach, that
    they may have an opportunity of proving themselves, and of enduring
    the tarring and feathering, and such things as those of us who have
    gone before them have had to endure.

    Elder Page, having arrived, was called upon, and addressed the
    congregation in relation to the non-performance of his mission
    to Jerusalem. He said that when he started with Elder Hyde, joy
    filled their hearts, and they were aware of the responsibility
    of their mission. Elder Hyde's vision was that he should be in
    Jerusalem alone, Elder Page considered Elder Hyde to be his father
    and guide in the mission, and felt it his duty to submit to Elder
    Hyde's opinion in all things; no Elders ever were more in concert
    on a mission than they were while together. They made a covenant
    in Quincy to stand by each other while on the mission, and if they
    were insulted or imposed upon they would stand by each other, even
    unto death, and not separate unless to go a few miles to preach a
    sermon, that all moneys should go into one purse, and it did so.

    {584} Elder Hyde, in Indiana, first said he would go to visit
    Brother Knight, and that Elder Page should stay and preach; he
    assented, and went and returned to Indianapolis. Elder Page had a
    mare given him on account of both. Elder Hyde then took the mare,
    went on, left his luggage with Elder Page; while away he sold the
    mare for $40, and received $60 more as a donation from the man to
    whom he had sold the mare; he returned, they preached at Dayton and
    received a handsome contribution. Elder Page preached sixteen miles
    off, and raised a branch. Elder Hyde went to Cincinnati, revised
    the "Missouri Persecutions," got 2,000 copies printed, paid for
    them, and took part of them with him, and left a large box full,
    and about 150 loose copies with Elder Page. Elder Hyde started
    for Philadelphia, purposing to visit churches on the way; he left
    Elder Page $23.31. Elder Page returned to Dayton and Milton, and
    sold books, with the intention of following Elder Hyde as soon as
    practicable; but he stayed a day or two too long, and the river
    closed by the frost, from one to two weeks earlier than usual.
    Elder Hyde told him that it was possible they might be from one to
    two years before they would leave America, as it would take upwards
    of $1,000 each to take them to Jerusalem and back, that it would
    be slow gleaning in England, and assigned this as a reason for not
    immediately following Elder Hyde, thinking that he would be sure of
    seeing him in the spring. Elder Page accused himself of not using
    better economy in proceeding on his journey.

    There came out a piece in the paper, stating the displeasure of
    the Lord respecting Elder Hyde and Elder Page, he sat down and
    wrote a piece to put in the paper, acknowledging the justice of the
    charge, but wisdom prevented its being published; preached about
    Washington, &c., gathered funds for the mission in Westchester and
    in Philadelphia.

    Elder Hyde raised funds on behalf of the mission, by applauding
    Elder Page's talents, wisdom, &c., but they were disappointed in
    him when they saw him; he raised funds for the mission, the most
    liberal was in Philadelphia. He intended to sail on the 25th of
    July, but the brethren said that if he would remain two weeks, they
    would raise funds for him; they found that it would take longer,
    and he decided to stay a month, he then received a command through
    a letter from President Hyrum Smith to an official character in
    Philadelphia, requesting him to return; he wrote to ascertain
    the reason but did not get an answer, he was then called in by
    President Joseph Smith and Elder Brigham Young.

    Elder Hyde would often renew the covenant between them to never
    part with each other in that mission. Elder Page had no blame to
    attach to Elder Hyde; he supposed he had done right, but if he
    had been in {585} his place, he would have tarried for him until
    the spring. The reports of his having apostatized, &c., returned
    even from this place to New York. Many reproved him for leaving
    Cincinnati for Dayton.

    President Joseph Smith then arose and stated that it was wrong to
    make the covenant referred to by him; that it created a lack of
    confidence for two men to covenant to reveal all acts of secrecy or
    otherwise, to each other, and Elder Page showed a little grannyism.
    He said that no two men, when they agreed to go together ought
    to separate, that the Prophets of old would not, and quoted the
    circumstance of Elijah and Elisha, 2 Kings ii., when about to go
    to Gilgal, also when about to go to Jericho, and to Jordan, that
    Elisha could not get clear of Elijah, that he clung to his garment
    until he was taken to heaven; and that Elder Page should have stuck
    by Elder Hyde, and he might have gone to Jerusalem, that there is
    nothing very bad in it, but by the experience let us profit; again
    the Lord made use of Elder Page as a scapegoat to procure funds for
    Elder Hyde. When Elder Hyde returns, we will reconsider the matter,
    and perhaps send them back to Jerusalem; we will fellowship Elder
    Page until Elder Hyde comes, and we will then weld them together
    and make them one. A vote was then put and carried that we hold
    Elder Page in full fellowship.

    Voted that Elder Page be sent to Pittsburgh.

    Sung a hymn--adjourned for one hour and a half, at one o'clock.

    Met agreeable to adjournment--choir sung a hymn--prayer by Elder H.
    C. Kimball.

    Elder Lyman Wight called to know if there were any present of
    the rough and weak things, who wished to be ordained, and go and
    preach, who have not been before ordained. Elder Lyman Wight then
    addressed those who intended to be ordained, on the subject of
    their duty and requirements to go and preach.

    President Hyrum Smith spoke concerning the Elders who went forth to
    preach from Kirtland, and were afterwards called in for the washing
    and anointing at the dedication of the House, and those who go now
    will be called in also, when this Temple is about to be dedicated,
    and will then be endowed to go forth with mighty power, having the
    same anointing, that all may go forth and have the same power, the
    first, second, and so on, of the Seventies, and all those formerly
    ordained. This will be an important and beneficial mission, and
    not many years until those now sent will be called in again. He
    then spoke in contradiction of a report in circulation about Elders
    Heber C. Kimball, Brigham Young, himself, and others of the Twelve,
    alleging that a sister had been shut in a room for several days,
    and that they had endeavored to induce her to believe in having two
    wives. Also cautioned the sisters against going to the steamboats.

    {586} President Joseph Smith spoke upon the subject of the
    stories respecting Elders Kimball and others, showing the folly
    and inconsistency of spending any time in conversing about such
    stories, or hearkening to them, for there is no person that is
    acquainted with our principles who would believe such lies, except
    Sharp, the editor of the _Warsaw Signal_.

    Baptisms for the dead, and for the healing of the body must be in
    the font, those coming into the Church, and those re-baptized may
    be baptized in the river. A box should be prepared for the use of
    the font, that the clerk may be paid, and a book procured by the
    moneys to be put therein, by those baptized, the remainder to go to
    the use of the Temple.

    Sung a hymn.

    Ordinations to take place tomorrow morning. Baptisms in the font
    also.

    There were 275 ordained to the office of Elder, under the hands of
    the Twelve, during the Conference.

    _Friday 8_. Conference assembled. Sung a hymn. Prayer by Elder
    Heber C. Kimball.

    Elder Page then addressed the assembly upon several subjects; made
    many interesting remarks concerning being called to the ministry,
    labor in the vineyard, &c. Spoke of his own travels and the fruits
    of his labors as an encouragement to the young Elders who were
    going into the vineyard.

    President Joseph Smith said the baptisms would be attended to, also
    the ordinations.

    Sung a hymn.

    Elder John Taylor preached a sermon while the ordinations and
    baptisms were going on, on the subject of infidelity, showing
    that the arguments used against the Bible were rationally,
    scientifically, and philosophically false.

    The stand was occupied in the afternoon by Elder Amasa M. Lyman,
    who was followed by Elder William Smith; then the Conference closed
    by the benediction of President Joseph Smith.

    James Sloan, Clerk.

_Saturday, 9_.--In the morning I attended the funeral of Brother
Ephraim Marks, and in the evening attended city council.

    [The following brief synopsis of President Smith's remarks is from
    Elder Wilford Woodruff's journal:]

    {587} _Remarks of the Prophet at the Funeral of Ephraim Marks_.

    The Saints in Nauvoo assembled at the house of President Marks,
    at an early hour in the morning, to pay their last respects to
    the body of Ephraim Marks, son of President William Marks, who
    died on the evening of the 7th. A large procession formed and
    walked to the Grove, where a numerous congregation had assembled.
    President Joseph Smith spoke upon the occasion with much feeling
    and interest. Among his remarks he said, "It is a very solemn and
    awful time. I never felt more solemn; it calls to mind the death
    of my oldest brother, Alvin, who died in New York, and my youngest
    brother, Don Carlos Smith, who died in Nauvoo. It has been hard
    for me to live on earth and see these young men upon whom we have
    leaned for support and comfort taken from us in the midst of their
    youth. Yes, it has been hard to be reconciled to these things. I
    have sometimes thought that I should have felt more reconciled to
    have been called away myself if it had been the will of God; yet I
    know we ought to be still and know it is of God, and be reconciled
    to His will; all is right. It will be but a short time before we
    shall all in like manner be called: it may be the case with me as
    well as you. Some have supposed that Brother Joseph could not die;
    but this is a mistake: it is true there have been times when I have
    had the promise of my life to accomplish such and such things, but,
    having now accomplished those things, I have not at present any
    lease of my life, I am as liable to die as other men."

    I can say in my heart, that I have not done anything against
    Ephraim Marks that I am sorry for, and I would ask any of his
    companions if they have done anything against him that they are
    sorry for, or that they would not like to meet and answer for at
    the bar of God, if so, let it prove as a warning to all to deal
    justly before God, and with all mankind, then we shall be clear in
    the day of judgment.

    When we lose a near and dear friend, upon whom we have set our
    hearts, it should be a caution unto us not to set our affections
    too firmly upon others; knowing that they may in like manner be
    taken from us. Our affections should be placed upon God and His
    work, more intensely than upon our fellow beings.

_Sunday, April 10_.--I preached in the Grove, and pronounced a curse
upon all adulterers, and fornicators, and unvirtuous persons, and those
who have made use of my name to carry on their iniquitous designs.

    [The following brief synopsis of the Prophet's remarks is from the
    journal of Elder Wilford Woodruff:]

    {588} _Synopsis of Remarks of the Prophet--Reproof of all
    Wickedness_.

    Joseph the Seer arose in the power of God; reproved and rebuked
    wickedness before the people, in the name of the Lord God. He
    wished to say a few words to suit the condition of the general
    mass, and then said: I shall speak with authority of the Priesthood
    in the name of the Lord God, which shall prove a savor of life unto
    life, or of death unto death. Notwithstanding this congregation
    profess to be Saints, yet I stand in the midst of all [kinds of]
    characters and classes of men. If you wish to go where God is, you
    must be like God, or possess the principles which God possesses,
    for if we are not drawing towards God in principle, we are going
    from Him and drawing towards the devil. Yes, I am standing in the
    midst of all kinds of people.

    Search your hearts, and see if you are like God. I have searched
    mine, and feel to repent of all my sins.

    We have thieves among us, adulterers, liars, hypocrites. If God
    should speak from heaven, he would command you not to steal, not to
    commit adultery, not to covet, nor deceive, but be faithful over
    a few things. As far as we degenerate from God, we descend to the
    devil and lose knowledge, and without knowledge we cannot be saved,
    and while our hearts are filled with evil, and we are studying
    evil, there is no room in our hearts for good, or studying good.
    Is not God good? Then you be good; if He is faithful, then you be
    faithful. Add to your faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, and seek
    for every good thing.

    The Church must be cleansed, and I proclaim against all iniquity. A
    man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge, for if he does not
    get knowledge, he will be brought into captivity by some evil power
    in the other world, as evil spirits will have more knowledge, and
    consequently more power than many men who are on the earth. Hence
    it needs revelation to assist us, and give us knowledge of the
    things of God.

    What is the reason that the Priests of the day do not get
    revelation? They ask only to consume it upon their lust. Their
    hearts are corrupt, and they cloak their iniquity by saying there
    are no more revelations. But if any revelations are given of God,
    they are universally opposed by the priests and Christendom at
    large; for they reveal their wickedness and abominations.

    Many other remarks of interest were made.

_Monday, 11_.--I was at the lodge and at home.

The following is from the _West Messenger_.

    A Meteor Falls.

    Mr. Horace Palmer who was on his way from Dunkirk to Westfield,
    about three o'clock this morning, states that when about three
    miles {589} from Dunkirk, he was suddenly surrounded by a painful
    vivid light proceeding from a quantity of jelly-like substance,
    which fell on and about him, producing a sulphurous smell, a
    difficulty of breathing and a severe sensation of heat. As soon as
    he could so far recover from his astonishment as to look up, he saw
    the body of a terrific meteor passing above him, and appearing to
    be about a mile high. Its size appeared to be three or four feet in
    diameter, and nearly a mile in length. Its dimensions soon varied,
    becoming at first broader, and then diminishing to one fourth less
    than its former size, when it apparently separated in pieces, and
    fell to the earth; and immediately after he heard the explosion,
    which he says was tremendous.

    When Mr. Palmer arrived at Westfield, his face had the appearance
    of being severely scorched, and his eyes were much affected, and
    he did not recover for two or three days. Mr. Palmer is reputed to
    be a man of integrity and temperate habits; and his story, though
    marvelous, is generally believed.

    The meteor was seen by several other people, who speak of luminous
    bodies being detached from it. Its progress was attended by a noise
    similar to that of a train of cars on a railroad.

    A man who saw it from Salem represents it to have been of
    dimensions much larger than described by Mr. Palmer. The report of
    the explosion was heard also at Buffalo.

[Sidenote: Council Meeting with the Twelve.]

_Tuesday, 12_.--I attended the meeting of the lodge. The Twelve,
namely Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, William Smith,
Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, John E. Page, and Willard Richards,
clerk, assembled in the lodge room at four o'clock p. m., and appointed
John Taylor, Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball a committee to make
arrangements for the payments due from President Smith as Trustee
in Trust, to Mr. Wilkie, and voted that Randolph Alexander go on a
mission south to preach the Gospel. Also voted that the Twelve unite
their influence to persuade the brethren to consecrate all the old
notes, deeds, and obligations which they hold against each other to the
building of the Temple in Nauvoo, and that Willard Richards write an
epistle in the name of the Twelve on that subject, and publish it in
the _Times and Seasons_, which he did as follows:

    {590} _An Epistle of the Twelve to the Saints in America, Greeting_.

    Beloved Brethren: We have whereof to congratulate you at the
    present time, as we have the opportunity from day to day to witness
    the progress of the building of the Temple of the Lord in this
    city, and which is and must be accomplished by the united exertions
    of the labors of the brethren who reside here, and the tithings and
    contributions of those who are scattered abroad in the different
    states.

    In this glorious object the hearts of all the faithful are united,
    the hands of the laborer are made strong continually, and the purse
    strings of the more opulent are unloosed from time to time, to
    supply those things which are necessary for upraising the stones of
    this noble edifice; and it may truly be said that the blessing of
    the Lord is upon His people; we have peace without and love within
    the borders of our beautiful city; beautiful, indeed, for situation
    is Nauvoo: the crown of the great valley of the Mississippi, the
    joy of every honest heart.

    Although all things are more prosperous concerning the Temple than
    at any former period, yet the Saints must not suppose that all
    is done, or that they can relax their exertions and the work go
    on. It is a great work that God has required of His people, and
    it will require long and unwearied diligence to accomplish it;
    and redoubled diligence will be necessary with all, to get the
    building enclosed before another winter, so that the joiner can be
    employed during the cold weather; and we would again call upon all
    the Saints abroad to unite in making their deposits in banks known
    to be good and safe, and forward their certificate to the Trustee
    in Trust, as speedily as possible; when trusty men are not coming
    immediately to this place who can bring your offerings. All will
    want the privileges and blessings of the sanctuary, when it is
    completed; and all can have their wishes; but they can obtain them
    only by faithfulness and diligence in striving to build.

    We praise our God for the liberality that has hitherto been
    manifested; many have given more than was required of them, many
    have given their all, but they have done it cheerfully; they have
    done it voluntarily; and they shall have a great reward; for the
    blessings of heaven and earth shall be multiplied unto such; even
    the blessings of that Priesthood which hath neither beginning of
    days nor end of life.

    While there are those who of their abundance have built unto
    themselves fine houses, and who ride in fine carriages and on
    horseback, and regale themselves with the good things of the land,
    and at the same time they have left the Lord's house untouched, or,
    if touched at all, have touched it so lightly as scarce to leave
    the print of their little finger: their reward will be according
    to their deeds, and unless they speedily repent, and come up with
    their abundance to the help of the Lord, they will find in the end
    that they have no part nor lot in this {591} matter; their gold and
    silver will become cankered, their garments moth eaten, and they
    will perish in their own slothfulness and idolatry, leaving none to
    mourn their absence.

    But, brethren, the Temple will be built. There are hundreds and
    thousands who stand ready to sacrifice the last farthing they
    possess on the earth rather than have the building of the Lord's
    house delayed, all while this spirit prevails no power beneath the
    heavens can hinder its progress: but we desire you all to help
    with the ability which God has given you; that you may all share
    the blessings which will distil from heaven to earth through this
    consecrated channel.

    This is not all. It will be in vain for us to build a place where
    the Son of Man may lay his head, and leave the cries of the widow
    and the fatherless, unheard by us, ascending up to the orphan's
    God and widow's Friend. It is in vain, we cry Lord, Lord, and do
    not the things our Lord hath commanded; to visit the widow, the
    fatherless, the sick, the lame, the blind, the destitute, and
    minister to their necessities; and it is but reasonable that such
    cases should be found among a people who have but recently escaped
    the fury of a relentless mob on the one hand, and gathered from the
    half-starved population of the scattered nations on the other.

    Neither is this all. It is not sufficient that the poor be fed and
    clothed, the sick ministered unto, the Temple built--no, when all
    this is accomplished, there must be a year of Jubilee: there must
    be a day of rejoicing, there must be a time of release to Zion's
    sons, or our offerings, our exertions, our hopes, and our prayers
    will be in vain, and God will not accept of the doings of His
    people.

    On these days of darkness which overspread our horizon; when the
    Wolf was howling for his prey around the streets of Kirtland; when
    the burglar was committing his midnight and midday depredations
    in Jackson county; when the heartless politician was thrusting
    his envious darts in Clay county--and when the savage war whoop,
    echoed and re-echoed through Far West, and Zion's noblest sons
    were chained in dungeons, and her defenseless daughters driven
    by a horde of savages, from their once peaceful homes, to seek a
    shelter in a far distant land--many of the brethren stepped forward
    to their rescue, and not only expended all they possessed for the
    relief of suffering innocence, but gave their notes and bonds to
    "obtain more means, with which to help those who could not escape
    the overwhelming surge of banishment from all that they possessed
    on earth."

    Death, wounds, and sickness, from the mob, and the cold and
    shelterless situation of the brethren, followed in quick
    succession; and all the means which could possibly be obtained from
    each other, in addition to the noble charities of the citizens of
    Illinois, were brought into {592} requisition to sustain a remnant
    of the Saints, who now mostly inhabit this place.

    To accomplish this, the President and Bishops loaned money and such
    things as could be obtained, and gave their obligations in good
    faith for the payment of the same; and many of the brethren signed
    with them at different times and in different places, to strengthen
    their hands and help them carry out their designs; fully expecting,
    that, at some future day, they would be enabled to liquidate all
    such claims, to the satisfaction of all parties.

    Many of these claims have already been settled; many have been
    given up as cancelled by those who held them, and many yet remain
    unsettled. The Saints have had many difficulties to encounter
    since they arrived at this place. In a new country, destitute of
    houses, food, clothing, and nearly all the necessaries of life,
    which were rent from them by an unfeeling mob--having to encounter
    disease and difficulties unnumbered, it is not surprising that the
    Church has not been able to liquidate all such claims, or that
    many individuals should yet remain involved, from the foregoing
    circumstances; and while things remain as they are, and men
    remain subject to the temptations of evil as they now are, the
    day of release, and year of jubilee cannot be; and we write you
    especially at this time, brethren, for the purpose of making a
    final settlement of all such claims, of brother against brother; of
    the brethren against the Presidency and Bishops, &c.; claims which
    have originated out of the difficulties and calamities the Church
    has had to encounter, and which are of long standing, so that when
    the Temple is completed, there will be nothing from this source
    to produce jars, and discords, strifes and animosities, so as to
    prevent the blessings of heaven descending upon us as a people.

    To accomplish this most desirable object, we call on all the
    brethren who hold such claims, to bring them forward for a final
    settlement; and also those brethren who have individual claims
    against each other, of long standing, and the property of the
    debtor has been wrested from him by violence, or he has been
    unfortunate, and languished on a bed of sickness till his means are
    exhausted; and all claims whatsoever between brother and brother,
    where there is no reasonable prospect of a just and equitable
    settlement possible, that they also by some means, either by
    giving up their obligations, or destroying them, see that all such
    old affairs be adjusted, so that it shall not give occasion for
    difficulties to arise hereafter. Yes, brethren, bring all such
    old accounts, notes, bonds, etc., and make a consecration of them
    to the building of the Temple, and if anything can be obtained on
    them, it will be obtained; and if nothing can be obtained, when the
    Temple is completed, we will make a burnt-offering of them, even a
    peace-offering, which shall bind {593} the brethren together in the
    bonds of eternal peace, and love and union; and joy and salvation
    shall flow forth into your souls, and you shall rejoice and say it
    is good that we have harkened unto counsel, and set our brethren
    free, for God hath blessed us.

    How can we prosper while the Church, while the Presidency, while
    the Bishops, while those who have sacrificed everything but life,
    in this thing, for our salvation, are thus encumbered? It cannot
    be. Arise, then, brethren, set them free, and set each other free,
    and we will all be free together, we will be free indeed.

    Let nothing in this epistle be so construed as to destroy the
    validity of contracts, or give any one license not to pay his
    debts. The commandment is to pay every man his dues, and no man can
    get to heaven who justly owes his brother or his neighbor, who has
    or can get the means and will not pay it; it is dishonest, and no
    dishonest man can enter where God is.

    We remain, your brethren in the Gospel of Peace,

    Brigham Young, President,

    Heber C. Kimball,

    Orson Pratt,

    William Smith,

    John E. Page,

    Lyman Wight,

    Wilford Woodruff,

    John Taylor,

    Geo. A. Smith,

    Willard Richards, Clerk.

    _Military Appointments_.

    James Arlington Bennett, of Arlington House, Long Island, is hereby
    appointed Inspector-General of the Nauvoo-Legion, with the rank and
    title of Major-General; his place to be supplied when absent, by
    the Major-General of the Legion.

    Joseph Smith, Lieutenant-General.

    City of Nauvoo, Illinois, April 12th, A. D. 1842.

{594}



CHAPTER XXXV.

The General Bankrupt Law--The Doctrine of Baptism for the Dead--The
Prophet's Address to the Female Relief Society--The Keys of the
Priesthood and the Nauvoo Temple.

_Wednesday, April 13_.--I introduced Messrs. Backenstos, Stiles, and
Robinson into the Lodge Room in the morning, and Samuel H. Smith,
William Smith, and Vinson Knight in the evening.

About 150 Saints, from England landed in Nauvoo from the steamer
_Louisa_, and about 60 from the _Amaranth_.

[Sidenote: The Bankrupt Law.]

_Thursday, 14_.--Calvin A. Warren, Esq., lawyer, from Quincy, arrived,
and commenced an investigation of the principles of general insolvency
in my behalf according to the statutes; for the United States Congress
had previously instituted a general bankrupt law, by which any
individual who was owing to a certain amount more than he was able
to pay, could make out a schedule of his property, and of debts due
from himself, and by a specified process, pass the same in the hands
of a commissioner, government agent, or "assignee," who could make a
dividend of all his effects, and pay his creditors whatever percentage
his property amounted to, and then the individual was at liberty to
start anew in the world, and was not subject to liquidate any claims
which were held against him previous to his insolvency, although his
property might not have paid but the least percentage, or none at all.

[Sidenote: The Prophet Forced into Bankruptcy.]

The justice or injustice of such a principle in law, I leave for them
who made it, the United States. Suffice it {595} to say, the law was as
good for the Saints as for the Gentiles, and whether I would or not, I
was forced into the measure by having been robbed, mobbed, plundered,
and wasted of all my property, time after time, in various places, by
the very ones who made the law, namely, the people of the United State,
thereby having been obliged to contract heavy debts to prevent the
utter destruction of myself, family and friends, and by those who were
justly and legally owing me, taking the advantage of the same act of
bankruptcy, so that I could not collect my just dues, thus leaving me
no alternative but to become subject again to stripping, wasting, and
destitution, by vexatious writs, and law suits, and imprisonments, or
take that course to extricate myself, which the law had pointed out.

_Friday, 15_.--Editorial from the _Times and Seasons_:

    Baptism For The Dead.

    The great designs of God in relation to the salvation of the human
    family, are very little understood by the professedly wise and
    intelligent generation in which we live. Various and conflicting
    are the opinions of men concerning the plan of salvation, the
    requisitions of the Almighty, the necessary preparations for
    heaven, the state and condition of departed spirits, and the
    happiness or misery that is consequent upon the practice of
    righteousness and iniquity according to their several notions of
    virtue and vice.

    The Mussulman condemns the heathen, the Jew, and the Christian,
    and the whole world of mankind that reject his Koran, as infidels,
    and consigns the whole of them to perdition. The Jew believes that
    the whole world that rejects his faith and are not circumcised,
    are Gentile dogs, all will be damned. The heathen is equally as
    tenacious about his principles, and the Christian consigns all to
    perdition who cannot bow to his creed, and submit to his _ipse
    dixit_.

    But while one portion of the human race is judging and condemning
    the other without mercy, the Great Parent of the universe looks
    upon the whole of the human family with a fatherly care and
    paternal regard; He views them as His offspring, and without any
    of those contracted feelings that influence the children of men,
    causes "His sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth
    rain on the just and on the unjust." He holds the reins of judgment
    in His hands; He is a wise Lawgiver, and {596} will judge all
    men, not according to the narrow, contracted notions of men, but,
    "according to the deeds done in the body whether they be good or
    evil," or whether these deeds were done in England, America, Spain,
    Turkey, or India. He will judge them, "not according to what they
    have not, but according to what they have," those who have lived
    without law, will be judged without law, and those who have a
    law, will by judged by that law. We need not doubt the wisdom and
    intelligence of the Great Jehovah; He will award judgment or mercy
    to all nations according to their several deserts, their means of
    obtaining intelligence, the laws by which they are governed, the
    facilities afforded them of obtaining correct information, and His
    inscrutable designs in relation to the human family; and when the
    designs of God shall be made manifest, and the curtain of futurity
    be withdrawn, we shall all of us eventually have to confess that
    the Judge of all the earth has done right.

    The situation of the Christian nations after death, is a subject
    that has called forth all the wisdom and talent of the philosopher
    and the divine, and it is an opinion which is generally received,
    that the destiny of man is irretrievably fixed at his death, and
    that he is made either eternally happy, or eternally miserable;
    that if a man dies without a knowledge of God, he must be eternally
    damned, without any mitigation of his punishment, alleviation of
    his pain, or the most latent hope of a deliverance while endless
    ages shall roll along. However orthodox this principle may be,
    we shall find that it is at variance with the testimony of Holy
    Writ, for our Savior says, that all manner of sin and blasphemy
    shall be forgiven men wherewith they shall blaspheme; but the
    blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven, neither
    in this world, nor in the world to come, evidently showing that
    there are sins which may be forgiven in the world to come, although
    the sin of blasphemy [against the Holy Ghost] cannot be forgiven.
    Peter, also, in speaking concerning our Savior, says, that "He
    went and preached unto the spirits in prison, which sometimes were
    disobedient, when once the long suffering of God waited in the
    days of Noah," (I Peter iii: 19, 20). Here then we have an account
    of our Savior preaching to the spirits in prison, to spirits that
    had been imprisoned from the days of Noah; and what did He preach
    to them? That they were to stay there? Certainly not! Let His own
    declaration testify. "He hath sent me to heal the broken hearted,
    to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to
    the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised." (Luke iv: 18.
    Isaiah has it--"To bring out the prisoners from the prison, and
    them that sit in darkness from the prison house.") (Isaiah xlii:
    7.) It is very evident from this that He not only went to preach
    to them, but to deliver, or bring them out of the prison house.
    Isaiah, in {597} testifying concerning the calamities that will
    overtake the inhabitants of the earth, says, "The earth shall reel
    to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be removed like a cottage;
    and the transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it; and it shall
    fall and not rise again. And it shall come to pass in that day,
    that the Lord shall punish the host of the high ones that are on
    high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth. And they shall
    be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and
    shall be shut up in the prison, and after many days shall they be
    visited." Thus we find that God will deal with all the human family
    equally, and that as the antediluvians had their day of visitation,
    so will those characters referred to by Isaiah, have their time of
    visitation and deliverance, after having been many days in prison.

    The great Jehovah contemplated the whole of the events connected
    with the earth, pertaining to the plan of salvation, before it
    rolled into existence, or ever "the morning stars sang together"
    for joy; the past, the present, and the future were and are, with
    Him, one eternal "now;" he knew of the fall of Adam, the iniquities
    of the antediluvians, of the depth of iniquity that would be
    connected with the human family, their weakness and strength, their
    power and glory, apostasies, their crimes, their righteousness and
    iniquity; He comprehended the fall of man, and his redemption; He
    knew the plan of salvation and pointed it out; He was acquainted
    with the situation of all nations and with their destiny; He
    ordered all things according to the council of His own will; He
    knows the situation of both the living and the dead, and has made
    ample provision for their redemption, according to their several
    circumstances, and the laws of the kingdom of God, whether in this
    world, or in the world to come.

    The idea that some men form of the justice, judgment, and mercy
    of God, is too foolish for an intelligent man to think of: for
    instance, it is common for many of our orthodox preachers to
    suppose that if a man is not what they call converted, if he dies
    in that state he must remain eternally in hell without any hope.
    Infinite years in torment must he spend, and never, never, never
    have an end; and yet this eternal misery is made frequently to
    rest upon the merest casualty. The breaking of a shoe-string, the
    tearing of a coat of those officiating, or the peculiar location
    in which a person lives, may be the means, indirectly of his
    damnation, or the cause of his not being saved. I will suppose a
    case which is not extraordinary: Two men, who have been equally
    wicked, who have neglected religion, are both of them taken sick
    at the same time; one of them has the good fortune to be visited
    by a praying man, and he gets converted a few minutes before he
    dies; the other sends for three different praying men, a tailor,
    a shoemaker, and a tinman; the tinman has a handle to solder to a
    can, the tailor has a {598} buttonhole to work on some coat that
    he needed in a hurry, and the shoemaker has a patch to put on
    somebody's boot; they none of them can go in time, the man dies,
    and goes to hell: one of these is exalted to Abraham's bosom, he
    sits down in the presence of God and enjoys eternal, uninterrupted
    happiness, while the other, equally as good as he, sinks to eternal
    damnation, irretrievable misery and hopeless despair, because a man
    had a boot to mend, the button-hole of a coat to work, or a handle
    to solder on to a saucepan.

    The plans of Jehovah are not so unjust, the statements of holy writ
    so visionary, nor the plan of salvation for the human family so
    incompatible with common sense; at such proceedings God would frown
    with indignance, angels would hide their heads in shame, and every
    virtuous, intelligent man would recoil.

    If human laws award to each man his deserts, and punish all
    delinquents according to their several crimes, surely the Lord
    will not be more cruel than man, for He is a wise legislator, and
    His laws are more equitable, His enactments more just, and His
    decisions more perfect than those of man; and as man judges his
    fellow man by law, and punishes him according to the penalty of the
    law, so does God of heaven judge "according to the deeds done in
    the body." To say that the heathens would be damned because they
    did not believe the Gospel would be preposterous, and to say that
    the Jews would all be damned that do not believe in Jesus would be
    equally absurd; for "how can they believe on him of whom they have
    not heard, and how can they hear without a preacher, and how can he
    preach except he be sent;" consequently neither Jew nor heathen can
    be culpable for rejecting the conflicting opinions of sectarianism,
    nor for rejecting any testimony but that which is sent of God, for
    as the preacher cannot preach except he be sent, so the hearer
    cannot believe without he hear a "sent" preacher, and cannot be
    condemned for what he has not heard, and being without law, will
    have to be judged without law.

    When speaking about the blessings pertaining to the Gospel, and
    the consequences connected with disobedience to the requirements,
    we are frequently asked the question, what has become of our
    fathers? Will they all be damned for not obeying the Gospel,
    when they never heard it? Certainly not. But they will possess
    the same privilege that we here enjoy, through the medium of the
    everlasting priesthood, which not only administers on earth, but
    also in heaven, and the wise dispensations of the great Jehovah;
    hence those characters referred to by Isaiah will be visited by the
    Priesthood, and come out of their prison upon the same principle
    as those who were disobedient in the days of Noah were visited by
    our Savior [who possessed the everlasting Melchisedek Priesthood]
    and had the Gospel preached to them, by Him in prison; {599} and in
    order that they might fulfill all the requisitions of God, living
    friends were baptized for their dead friends, and thus fulfilled
    the requirement of God, which says, "Except a man be born of water
    and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God," they
    were baptized of course, not for themselves, but for their dead.

    Chrysostum says that the Marchionites practiced baptism for their
    dead. "After a catechumen was dead, they had a living man under
    the bed of the deceased; then coming to the dead man, they asked
    him whether he would receive baptism, and he making no answer, the
    other answered for him, and said that he would be baptized in his
    stead; and so they baptized the living for the dead." The church
    of course at that time was degenerate, and the particular form
    might be incorrect, but the thing is sufficiently plain in the
    Scriptures, hence Paul, in speaking of the doctrine, says, "Else
    what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead
    rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead?" (1 Cor.
    xv: 29). Hence it was that so great a responsibility rested upon
    the generation in which our Savior lived, for, says he, "That upon
    you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from
    the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias, son of
    Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar. Verily I
    say unto you, all these things shall come upon this generation."
    (Matthew xxiii: 35, 36). Hence as they possessed greater privileges
    than any other generation, not only pertaining to themselves, but
    to their dead, their sin was greater, as they not only neglected
    their own salvation but that of their progenitors, and hence their
    blood was required at their hands.

    And now as the great purposes of God are hastening to their
    accomplishment, and the things spoken of in the Prophets are
    fulfilling, as the kingdom of God is established on the earth, and
    the ancient order of things restored, the Lord has manifested to us
    this day and privilege, and we are commanded to be baptized for our
    dead, thus fulfilling the words of Obadiah, when speaking of the
    glory of the latter-day: "And saviors shall come upon Mount Zion to
    judge the remnant of Esau, and the kingdom shall be the Lord's." A
    view of these things reconciles the Scriptures of truth, justifies
    the ways of God to man, places the human family upon an equal
    footing, and harmonizes with every principle of righteousness,
    justice and truth. We will conclude with the words of Peter: "For
    the time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will
    of the Gentiles." "For, for this cause was the Gospel preached also
    to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men
    in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit."

I continued busily engaged in making out a list of {600} debtors and
an invoice of my property to be passed into the hands of the assignee,
until--

_Saturday evening the 16th_.--On this day the first number of _The
Wasp_, a miscellaneous weekly newspaper was first published at
my office, William Smith, editor, devoted to the arts, sciences,
literature, agriculture, manufacture, trade, commerce, and the general
news of the day, on a small sheet, at $1.50 per annum.

_Sunday, 17_.--Spent the day with my family at home.

[Sidenote: Causes of the Prophet's Insolvency.]

_Monday, 18_.--In consequence of the utter annihilation of our
property by mob violence in the state of Missouri, and the immense
expenses which we were compelled to incur, to defend ourselves from
the cruel persecutions of that state, we were reduced to the necessity
of availing ourselves of the privileges of the general bankrupt law;
therefore I went to Carthage with my brothers Hyrum and Samuel H.
Smith, and severally testified to our list of insolvency before the
clerk of the county commissioners' court. Sidney Rigdon and many more
brethren were at Carthage the same day on business. My clerk, Dr.
Richards, went with us.

About this time a disturbance broke out in Rhode Island by a part of
the inhabitants, wishing to change their Constitution, and make it like
those of other states in the Union, which created much confusion and
angry feeling in that state, and excitement in other states.

_Tuesday, 19_.--Rode out and examined some land near the northern
limits of the city, &c.

_Wednesday, 20_.--Assisted in surveying some land in section 25, which
I sold to William Cross.

_Thursday, 21_.--Friday and Saturday was engaged in temporal and
spiritual affairs at home, the office, &c.

_Friday, 22_.--

    _James Arlington Bennett Honored_.

    Honorary Degree. Ordered by the chancellor and regents of the
    University of the City of Nauvoo, that the honorary degree of L.
    L. {601} D. be, and the same hereby is, conferred on General James
    Arlington Bennett, of Arlington House, New York.

    Passed April 22, 1842.

    John C. Bennett, Chancellor,

    William Law, Registrar.

_Sunday, 24_.--Preached on the hill near the Temple, concerning the
building of the Temple, and reproved the merchants and the rich who
would not assist in building it.

_Monday, 25, Tuesday, 26 and Wednesday, 27_.--I was engaged in reading,
meditation, &c., mostly with my family.

_Thursday, 28_.--

    "_Repast Militaire_."

    General Joseph Smith and lady, present their compliments to
    the officers (and their respective ladies) of the consolidated
    General Staff of the Nauvoo Legion, that is to say, his personal
    staff, Major-General Bennett's staff, including the band,
    Brigadier-General Law's staff, and Brigadier-General Rich's staff,
    and respectfully solicit their company at a _Repast Militaire_, at
    his quarters on the 7th day of May _proximo_, at one o'clock p. m.

    General Bennett has been ordered to issue a programme of the
    operations and field exercises of the day, which will appear in
    ample form, and due season.

    April 28, A. D. 1842.

    Headquarters, Nauvoo Legion,

    City Of Nauvoo, Illinois, April 28, 1842.

    _General Orders_--

    The Lieutenant-General directs that a _programme militaire_ issue
    from the office of his commanding general for the 7th of May
    _proximo_, which I now proceed to consummate.

    1st. The Adjutants will form the lines of their respective
    regiments, and the Colonels of the line assume command at nine
    o-clock, a. m.

    2nd. The Adjutant-General will form the line of the Legion, and the
    Brigadier-Generals assume the command of their respective cohorts
    at half-past nine o'clock a. m.

    3rd. The Major-General will assume the command of the Legion at ten
    o'clock a. m.

    4th. At a quarter past ten o'clock a. m., the Lieutenant-General
    will be escorted to the field at the review station.

    {602} 5th. General review and inspection will follow, accompanied
    by such evolutions and exercises as the time will admit of.

    6th. At half-past twelve o'clock p. m. the forces will be dismissed
    until a quarter before two o'clock p. m.

    7th. At two o'clock p. m. the Major-General will resume the command
    and perform such military movements and field exercises as the
    Lieutenant-General may direct.

    8th. At three o'clock p. m. the cohorts will separate and form the
    line of battle, the Brigadiers assume their respective commands
    and General Law's command will make a descent upon that of General
    Rich's in order of sham battle.

    9th. At half-past three o'clock p. m. the cohorts will resume their
    positions in the line of the Legion, and a sham battle will be
    fought between the mounted riflemen under the immediate command of
    Lieutenant General Smith and the Invincibles under the immediate
    command of Major-General Bennett.

    10th. At half-past four o'clock p. m. the forces will be dismissed
    for the day.

    11. Every officer, musician and private will be required to be at
    their respective posts at the hours specified throughout the day,
    under the most severe penalties of the law.

    John C. Bennett

    Major-General.

[Sidenote: The Rights and Privileges of the Women in the Church.]

At two o'clock I met the members of the "Female Relief Society," and
after presiding at the admission of many new members, gave a lecture on
the Priesthood, showing how the sisters would come in possession of the
privileges, blessings and gifts of the Priesthood, and that the signs
should follow them, such as healing the sick, casting out devils, &c.,
and that they might attain unto these blessings by a virtuous life, and
conversation, and diligence in keeping all the commandments; a synopsis
of which was reported by Miss Eliza R. Snow, as follows:

    _Remarks of the Prophet to the Relief Society_.

    President Smith arose and called the attention of the meeting to
    the 12th chapter 1st Corinthians--"Now concerning spiritual gifts,
    I would not have you ignorant." Said that the passage in the third
    verse, which reads, "No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but
    by the Holy Ghost," {603} should be translated "no man can _know_
    that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost." He continued to
    read the chapter, and give instructions respecting the different
    offices, and the necessity of every individual acting in the sphere
    allotted him or her, and filling the several offices to which they
    are appointed. He spoke of the disposition of many men to consider
    the lower offices in the Church dishonorable, and to look with
    jealous eyes upon the standing of others who are called to preside
    over them; that it was the folly and nonsense of the human heart
    for a person to be aspiring to other stations than those to which
    they are appointed of God for them to occupy; that it was better
    for individuals to magnify their respective callings, and wait
    patiently till God shall say to them, "Come up higher."

    He said the reason of these remarks being made was, that some
    little foolish things were circulating in the society, against some
    sisters not doing right in laying hands on the sick. Said that
    if the people had common sympathies they would rejoice that the
    sick could be healed; that the time had not been before that these
    things could be in their proper order; that the Church is not fully
    organized, in its proper order, and cannot be, until the Temple is
    completed, where places will be provided for the administration of
    the ordinances of the Priesthood.

    President Smith continued the subject, by quoting the commission
    given to the ancient Apostles in Mark, 16th chapter, 15th, 16th,
    17th, 18th verses, "Go ye into all the world, and preach the
    Gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall
    be saved; but he that believed not shall be damned. And these
    signs shall follow them that believe: In my name shall they cast
    out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up
    serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt
    them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover."

    No matter who believeth, these signs, such as healing the sick,
    casting out devils, &c., should follow all that believe, whether
    male or female. He asked the Society if they could not see by
    this sweeping promise, that wherein they are ordained, it is the
    privilege of those set apart to administer in that authority, which
    is conferred on them; and if the sisters should have faith to heal
    the sick, let all hold their tongues, and let everything roll on.

    He said, if God has appointed him, and chosen him as an instrument
    to lead the Church, why not let him lead it through? Why stand in
    the way when he is appointed to do a thing? Who knows the mind of
    God? Does He not reveal things differently from what we expect?
    He remarked that he was continually rising, although he had
    everything bearing him down, standing in his way, and opposing;
    notwithstanding all this opposition, he always comes out right in
    the end.

    {604} Respecting females administering for the healing of the sick,
    he further remarked, there could be no devil in it, if God gave His
    sanction by healing; that there could be no more sin in any female
    laying hands on and praying for the sick, than in wetting the face
    with water; it is no sin for anybody to administer that has faith,
    or if the sick have faith to be healed by their administration.

    He reproved those that were disposed to find fault with the
    management of the concerns of the Church, saying God had called
    him to lead the Church, and he would lead it right; those that
    undertake to interfere will be ashamed when their own folly is made
    manifest; that he calculates to organize the Church in its proper
    order as soon as the Temple is completed.

    President Smith continued by speaking of the difficulties he had to
    surmount ever since the commencement of the work, in consequence of
    aspiring men. "Great big Elders," as he called them, who had caused
    him much trouble; to whom he had taught the things of the kingdom
    in private councils, they would then go forth into the world and
    proclaim the things he had taught them, as their own revelations;
    said the same aspiring disposition will be in this Society, and
    must be guarded against; that every person should stand, and act
    in the place appointed, and thus sanctify the Society and get it
    pure. He said he had been trampled under foot by aspiring Elders,
    for all were infected with that spirit; for instance, John E. Page
    and others had been aspiring; they could not be exalted, but must
    run away as though the care and authority of the Church were vested
    with them. He said he had a subtle devil to deal with, and could
    only curb him by being humble.

    As he had this opportunity, he was going to instruct the ladies of
    this Society, and point out the way for them to conduct themselves,
    that they might act according to the will of God; that he did not
    know that he should have many opportunities of teaching them, as
    they were going to be left to themselves; they would not long
    have him to instruct them; that the Church would not have his
    instructions long, and the world would not be troubled with him a
    great while, and would not have his teachings [in person].

    He spoke of delivering the keys of the Priesthood to the Church,
    and said that the faithful members of the Relief Society should
    receive them in connection with their husbands, that the Saints
    whose integrity has been tried and proved faithful, might know
    how to ask the Lord and receive an answer; for according to his
    prayers, God had appointed him elsewhere.

    He exhorted the sisters always to concentrate their faith and
    prayers for, and place confidence in their husbands, whom God has
    appointed for them to honor, and in those faithful men whom God has
    placed at {605} the head of the Church to lead His people; that
    we should arm and sustain them with our prayers; for the keys of
    the kingdom are about to be given to them, that they may be able
    to detect everything false; as well as to all the Elders who shall
    prove their integrity in due season.

    He said if one member becomes corrupt, and you know it, you must
    immediately put it away, or it will either injure or destroy the
    whole body. The sympathies of the heads of the Church have induced
    them to bear a long time with those who were corrupt until they are
    obliged to cut them off, lest all become contaminated; you must put
    down iniquity, and by your good examples, stimulate the Elders to
    good works; if you do right, there is no danger of your going too
    fast.

    He said he did not care how fast we run in the path of virtue:
    resist evil, and there is no danger; God, men, and angels will
    not condemn those that resist everything that is evil, and devils
    cannot; as well might the devil seek to dethrone Jehovah, as
    overthrow an innocent soul that resists everything which is evil.

    This is a charitable Society, and according to your natures; it is
    natural for females to have feelings of charity and benevolence.
    You are now placed in a situation in which you can act according to
    those sympathies which God has planted in your bosoms.

    If you live up to these principles, how great and glorious will
    be your reward in the celestial kingdom! If you live up to your
    privileges, the angels cannot be restrained from being your
    associates. Females, if they are pure and innocent, can come in the
    presence of God; for what is more pleasing to God than innocence;
    you must be innocent, or you cannot come up before God: if we would
    come before God, we must keep ourselves pure, as He is pure.

    The devil has great power to deceive; he will so transform things
    as to make one gape at those who are doing the will of God. You
    need not be teazing your husbands because of their deeds, but let
    the weight of your innocence, kindness and affection be felt, which
    is more mighty than a millstone hung about the neck; not war,
    not jangle, not contradiction, or dispute, but meekness, love,
    purity--these are the things that should magnify you in the eyes
    of all good men. Achan [see Joshua vii.] must be brought to light,
    iniquity must be purged out from the midst of the Saints; then the
    veil will be rent, and the blessings of heaven will flow down--they
    will roll down like the Mississippi river.

    If this Society listen to the counsel of the Almighty, through the
    heads of the Church, they shall have power to command queens in
    their midst.

    I now deliver it as a prophecy, if the inhabitants of this state,
    with the people of the surrounding country, will turn unto the Lord
    {606} with all their hearts, ten years will not roll round before
    the kings and queens of the earth will come unto Zion, and pay
    their respects to the leaders of this people; they shall come with
    their millions, and shall contribute of their abundance for the
    relief of the poor, and the building up and beautifying of Zion.

    After this instruction, you will be responsible for your own sins;
    it is a desirable honor that you should so walk before our heavenly
    Father as to save yourselves; we are all responsible to God for the
    manner we improve the light and wisdom given by our Lord to enable
    us to save ourselves.

    President Smith continued reading from the above-mentioned
    chapter, and to give instructions respecting the order of God, as
    established in the Church, saving everyone should aspire only to
    magnify his own office and calling.

    He then commenced reading the 13th chapter--"Though I speak with
    the tongues of men and angels, and have no charity, I am become as
    sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal;" and said, don't be limited
    in your views with regard to your neighbor's virtue, but beware
    of self-righteousness, and be limited in the estimate of your own
    virtues, and not think yourselves more righteous than others; you
    must enlarge your souls towards each other, if you would do like
    Jesus, and carry your fellow-creatures to Abraham's bosom. He said
    he had manifested long-suffering, forbearance and patience towards
    the Church, and also to his enemies; and we must bear with each
    other's failings, as an indulgent parent bears with the foibles of
    his children.

    President Smith then read the 2nd verse--"Though I have the gift
    of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and
    though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and
    have not charity, I am nothing." He then said, though a man should
    become mighty, do great things, overturn mountains, perform mighty
    works, and should then turn from his high station to do evil, to
    eat and drink with the drunken, all his former deeds would not save
    him, but he would go to destruction! As you increase in innocence
    and virtue, as you increase in goodness, let your hearts expand,
    let them be enlarged towards others; you must be long-suffering,
    and bear with the faults and errors of mankind.

    How precious are the souls of men! The female part of the
    community are apt to be contracted in their views. You must not
    be contracted, but you must be liberal in your feelings. Let this
    Society teach women how to behave towards their husbands, to treat
    them with mildness and affection. When a man is borne down with
    trouble, when he is perplexed with care and difficulty, if he can
    meet a smile instead of an argument or a murmur--if he can meet
    with mildness, {607} it will calm down his soul and soothe his
    feelings; when the mind is going to despair, it needs a solace of
    affection and kindness.

    You will receive instructions through the order of the Priesthood
    which God has established, through the medium of those appointed
    to lead, guide and direct the affairs of the Church in this last
    dispensation; and I now turn the key in your behalf in the name
    of the Lord, and this Society shall rejoice, and knowledge and
    intelligence shall flow down from this time henceforth; this is the
    beginning of better days to the poor and needy, who shall be made
    to rejoice and pour forth blessings on your heads.

    When you go home, never give a cross or unkind word to your
    husbands, but let kindness, charity and love crown your works
    henceforward; don't envy the finery and fleeting show of sinners,
    for they are in a miserable situation; but as far as you can, have
    mercy on them, for in a short time God will destroy them, if they
    will not repent and turn unto him.

    Let your labors be mostly confined to those around you, in the
    circle of your own acquaintance, as far as knowledge is concerned,
    it may extend to all the world; but your administering should be
    confined to the circle of your immediate acquaintance, and more
    especially to the members of the Relief Society. Those ordained to
    preside over and lead you, are authorized to appoint the different
    officers, as the circumstances shall require.

    If you have a matter to reveal, let it be in your own tongue; do
    not indulge too much in the exercise of the gift of tongues, or the
    devil will take advantage of the innocent and unwary. You may speak
    in tongues for your own comfort, but I lay this down for a rule,
    that if anything is taught by the gift of tongues, it is not to be
    received for doctrine.

    President Smith then gave instruction respecting the propriety
    of females administering to the sick by the prayer of faith,
    the laying on hands, or the anointing with oil; and said it was
    according to revelation that the sick should be nursed with
    herbs and mild food, and not by the hand of an enemy. Who are
    better qualified to administer than our faithful and zealous
    sisters, whose hearts are full of faith, tenderness, sympathy
    and compassion. No one. Said he was never placed in similar
    circumstances before, and never had given the same instruction; and
    closed his instructions by expressing his heart-felt satisfaction
    in improving this opportunity.

    The Spirit of the Lord was poured out in a very powerful manner,
    never to be forgotten by those present on this interesting occasion.

_Friday, 29_.--A conspiracy against the peace of my household was made
manifest, and it gave me some trouble {608} to counteract the design of
certain base individuals, and restore peace. The Lord makes manifest
to me many things, which it is not wisdom for me to make public, until
others can witness the proof of them.

_Saturday, 30_.--I received a visit from Judge James Adams, of
Springfield, and spent most of the day with him and my family. Signed
deeds to James and Charles Ivins, and many others.

_Sunday, May 1, 1842_.--I preached in the grove, on the keys of the
kingdom, charity, &c. The keys are certain signs and words by which
false spirits and personages may be detected from true, which cannot be
revealed to the Elders till the Temple is completed. The rich can only
get them in the Temple, the poor may get them on the mountain top as
did Moses. The rich cannot be saved without charity, giving to feed the
poor when and how God requires, as well as building. There are signs in
heaven, earth and hell; the Elders must know them all, to be endowed
with power, to finish their work and prevent imposition. The devil
knows many signs, but does not know the sign of the Son of Man, or
Jesus. No one can truly say he knows God until he has handled something
and this can only be in the holiest of holies.

_Monday, 2_.--The following Editorial appeared in the _Times and
Seasons_:

    The Temple.

    This noble edifice is progressing with great rapidity; strenuous
    exertions are being made on every hand to facilitate its erection,
    and materials of all kinds are in a great state of forwardness, and
    by next fall we expect to see the building enclosed; if not the top
    stone raised with "shouting of grace--grace unto it." There have
    been frequently, during the winter, as many as one hundred hands
    quarrying rock, while at the same time multitudes of others have
    been engaged in hauling, and in other kinds of labor.

    A company was formed last fall to go up to the pine country to
    purchase mills, and prepare and saw lumber for the Temple and
    the Nauvoo House, and the reports from them are very favorable:
    another {609} company has started, this last week, to take their
    place and to relieve those that are already there: on their return
    they are to bring a very large raft of lumber, for the use of the
    above-named houses.

    While the busy multitudes have thus been engaged in their several
    vocations performing their daily labor, and working one-tenth of
    their time, others have not been less forward in bringing in their
    tithings and consecrations for the same great object. Never since
    the foundation of this Church was laid, have we seen manifested a
    greater willingness to comply with the requisitions of Jehovah, a
    more ardent desire to do the will of God, more strenuous exertions
    used, or greater sacrifices made than there have been since the
    Lord said, "Let the Temple be built by the tithing of my people."
    It seemed as though the spirit of enterprise, philanthropy and
    obedience rested simultaneously upon old and young, and brethren
    and sisters, boys and girls, and even strangers, who were not
    in the Church, united with an unprecedented liberality in the
    accomplishment of this great work; nor could the widow, in many
    instances, be prevented, out of her scanty pittance from throwing
    in her two mites.

    We feel at this time to tender to all, old and young, both in the
    Church and out of it, our unfeigned thanks for their unprecedented
    liberality, kindness, diligence, and obedience which they have so
    opportunely manifested on the present occasion. Not that we are
    personally or individually benefitted in a pecuniary point of view,
    but when the brethren, as in this instance, show a unity of purpose
    and design, and all put their shoulder to the wheel, our care,
    labor, toil and anxiety is materially diminished, our yoke is made
    easy and our burden is light.

    The cause of God is one common cause, in which the Saints are alike
    all interested; we are all members of the one common body, and all
    partake of the same spirit, and are baptized into one baptism and
    possess alike the same glorious hope. The advancement of the cause
    of God and the building up of Zion is as much one man's business as
    another's. The only difference is, that one is called to fulfill
    one duty, and another, another duty; "but if one member suffers,
    all the members suffer with it, and if one member is honored all
    the rest rejoice with it, and the eye cannot say to the ear, I have
    no need of thee, nor the head to the foot, I have no need of thee;"
    party feelings, separate interests, exclusive designs should be
    lost sight of in the one common cause, in the interest of the whole.

    The building up of Zion is a cause that has interested the people
    of God in every age; it is a theme upon which prophets, priests
    and kings have dwelt with peculiar delight; they have looked
    forward with joyful anticipation to the day in which we live;
    and fired with heavenly and joyful anticipations they have sung
    and written and prophesied of this {610} our day; but they died
    without the sight; we are the favored people that God has made
    choice of to bring about the Latter-day glory; it is left for us
    to see, participate in and help to roll forward the Latter-day
    glory, the dispensation of the fullness of times, when God will
    gather together all things that are in heaven, and all things that
    are upon the earth, "even in one," when the Saints of God will
    be gathered in one from every nation, and kindred, and people,
    and tongue, when the Jews will be gathered together into one,
    the wicked will also be gathered together to be destroyed, as
    spoken of by the prophets; the Spirit of God will also dwell with
    His people, and be withdrawn from the rest of the nations, and
    all things whether in heaven or on earth will be in one, even in
    Christ. The heavenly Priesthood will unite with the earthly, to
    bring about those great purposes; and whilst we are thus united
    in the one common cause, to roll forth the kingdom of God, the
    heavenly Priesthood are not idle spectators, the Spirit of God will
    be showered down from above, and it will dwell in our midst. The
    blessings of the Most High will rest upon our tabernacles, and our
    name will be handed down to future ages; our children will rise up
    and call us blessed; and generations yet unborn will dwell with
    peculiar delight upon the scenes that we have passed through, the
    privations that we have endured; the untiring zeal that we have
    manifested; the all but insurmountable difficulties that we have
    overcome in laying the foundation of a work that brought about the
    glory and blessing which they will realize; a work that God and
    angels have contemplated with delight for generations past; that
    fired the souls of the ancient patriarchs and prophets; a work
    that is destined to bring about the destruction of the powers of
    darkness, the renovation of the earth, the glory of God, and the
    salvation of the human family.

    End Of Volume IV.

{611}



INDEX TO VOLUME IV.

Abraham, Book of--520 and note.

Adams, James--friendship for the Prophet, 20 and note.

Address, by First Presidency to Saints scattered abroad, 184 _et seq_.

Affidavits, on suffering of Saints in Missouri, 49-53, also 56-73 and
note, 60; of Hyrum Smith denouncing thieves, 460-61.

Alvord T., affidavit of, 57.

Allred, James--statement of on kidnapping, 156-7.

Apostles, The Twelve--farewell addresses of, 1-2; Apostles engaged
in selecting hymns, 3; trials of en route for England, 15; meeting
of at Cleveland, 19-20; granted permission to publish certain books
in England, 161-2; whereabouts of, January 1, 1841, 256; minutes of
meeting of in England, 324; ditto, 325-26; council of at Manchester,
332-335; epistle of to the Church in the British Isles, 344-348;
departure of from England, 352; arrival of at New York, 360-61; return
of to Nauvoo, 390; to share in labor of the Prophet, 400 and 403-404;
epistle of to Saints scattered abroad, 409-10; council meeting of,
412; minutes of council meeting of 429-30; epistles of to brethren
in America, 433-38; case of Benjamin Winchester before, 443; epistle
of, to Saints in England, 448-53; warning against thieves, 463-66 and
notes; epistle of on baptism for the dead, 472-5; minutes of a meeting
of, 478-79; gift of Hiram Kimball to, 484; whereabouts of, January
1, 1842, 490; epistle of to Saints in Europe, 558 _et seq_.; meeting
of with the Prophet in Masonic lodge, 589; epistles of to Saints in
America, 590 _et seq_.

Australia--report of work in, 343.

B

Babbitt, Elder Almon W.--preaches in Indiana, 17; permitted to build up
Kirtland, 476.

Baglev, Mr.--tax difficulty with the Prophet, 542.

Barlow, Israel--assists Brigham Young on Journey, 9.

Barnes, Lorenzo D.--report of to Elder Parley P. Pratt, 569.

Baptists--difference between and former day Saints, 350-51.

Baptisms--in Temple font, 558; for the dead, 568-9; for the dead,
editorial in _Times and Seasons_ on, 595 _et seq_.

Benbow, Elder John--liberality of, 188.

Bennett, Caleb--conference at House of, 6.

Bennett, James Arlington--honored, 600.

Bennett, John C.--first letters of to the Prophet, 169-72; biography,
169; elected mayor Nauvoo, 287; inaugural address of, 288-92.

Bennett, James Gordon--editor New York _Herald_, course of approved,
477.

Bennett, Samuel--sent on mission, 161; credentials of, 164.

Bishop, Gladden--disfellowshiped by High Council, 550.

{612} Books--list of for and against the Latter-day Saints, 253-6.

Book of Mormon--first English edition of, 274-286: Nauvoo edition,
proofs of read by Prophet, 494; ditto 500-501.

Boyee, Benjamin--kidnapping of, 154-6; 180.

British, Mission--history of, 313-321.

Brown, Alanson--kidnapping of, 154-56; 180.

Browning, O. H.--lawyer, counsel for the Prophet at Monmouth trial, 367
_et seq_.

Brunson, Col. Seymour--death of, 179.

Burke, John M.--affidavit of, 56.

C

Cahoon, William F.--affidavit of, 52.

Carpenter's Hall--Manchester, England, leased by the Saints, 141.

Carter, Samuel--affidavit of, 49 Prophet's instructions to, 153.

Carlin, Governor of Illinois--issues order for arrest of Prophet, 198-9.

Casper, Thomas D.--Affidavit of, 63.

Church, The--Admonished by the Prophet, 5; anniversary of organization
of celebrated, 326-31: thirteenth anniversary of, 582.

Clayton, William--preaches in Staffordshire; appointed clerk, Iowa High
Council, 382.

Clark, Hyrum--starts on mission to England, 7.

Clark, Joseph--affidavit of, 63.

Clark, Timothy B.--affidavit of, 58.

Clark, William O.--reproved by the Prophet, 445.

Cock Pit, Preston, England--preaching of Twelve in, 114.

Cole, Owen--Affidavit of, 64.

Commerce, Illinois, (afterwards Nauvoo)---appointed a stake of Zion,
12; boundary lines to be changed, 39; name of changed to Nauvoo, 21;
merged into Nauvoo plat, 322.

Committee, Senate Judiciary--case of the Missouri Saints before, 81-88,
adverse report of, 90-92; of Nauvoo citizens resolutions by, 157-9.

Conferences--minutes of at Commerce, 12; minutes of general, at Nauvoo,
105 _et seq_.; at Gadfield Elm, England, 131; ditto, 134 _et seq_.;
minutes at Stanley Hall, 138; of Church in England at Manchester, 146
_et seq_.; general at Nauvoo, minutes of, 204-7; general in England,
minutes of, 214-18 at Walnut Grove, Illinois, 387; London, minutes of,
298; at Philadelphia, 331; general of the Church at Nauvoo, minutes of,
336-343; in New York City, 344; minutes of London, 360; at Kirtland,
361; Attica, New York, 412; at Nauvoo, minutes of, general, 423-29; at
Lima, minutes of, 439-40; New York, 462; minutes of special at Nauvoo,
583 _et seq_.

Conner, Henry--converted, 184.

Council, High at Commerce. (Nauvoo)--names of counselors, 12; Advice
of to Saints west of Kirtland, 45 and note; authorizes publication of
hymn book, 49; appoints committee to collect testimony on case before
courts, 49; votes among for poor, 75, 76; votes to return consecrations
to the people, 88; memorial of Joseph Smith before, 136-138, 141, 143;
Elijah Fordham before, 180; minutes, 187-8; minutes of 219-20; account
of inspecting temporal concerns, 417; report of to the Saints, 504-5;
trial of Gladden Bishop before, 550.

Council, High at Iowa--appointed for Stake in Iowa, 16; minutes of,
16; order of speaking in, 16 and note; organization of completed, 21;
action of on {613} Missouri debts, 42, 54; minutes of, 94; changes in
352.

Council, of the Twelve--see _Apostles_.

Council, special--Liverpool, England, 296-7; at Nauvoo, 402.

Curtis, Simon P.--affidavit of, 67.

Curtis, Elder Theodore--before the Court of Sessions, Gloucester,
England, 380.

D

Davis, Amos--abuse of the Prophet, 549.

Davis, Matthew S.--reports Prophet's Washington discourse, 78.

Decker, Brother--assists Elders Young and Kimball en route for England,
11.

Discourse--the Prophet's at Nauvoo, 358-360.

_Dispatch_, England weekly newspaper--article against the Saints, 236.

Donaldson, Elder Wm.--goes to East India, 168.

Draper, Father--assists Elders Young and Kimball et al. en route for
England, 14.

Duel, Osmon M.--assists Elders Young and Kimball on mission, 9-10.

Duel, Sister O. M.--cares for Elders Young and Kimball, 10.

Duncan, Joseph--politician, speech against the Saints, 490, also note
480.

E

Election and Reprobation, Elders Brigham Young and Willard Richards,
256.

Emigration--arrangements of for English Saints, 510-13.

England--arrival of Apostles in, 76; labors of Elders in, 76;
emigration agency in, 484.

Epistles--see _Letters_.

F

Freedom, Adams County, Illinois--Stake organized at, 233.

Female Relief Society--organization of, 552; ditto, 567-8; remarks of
the Prophet to, 570; remarks of the Prophet to, 602-7.

Fielding, Joseph--preaches in England, 7.

Font--baptismal of Temple described, 446.

Fordham, Elijah--healed by the Prophet, 4, and note; before High
Council at Nauvoo, 180.

Foster, Dr. Robert D.--attends on Sidney Rigdon, 19-21; on trial for
slandering, 239-250.

Foutz, Jacob--affidavit of, 68.

Fulmer, David--prefers charges, 219.

G

Galland, Isaac--letter of Prophet to; his power of attorney for the
Prophet cancelled, 495-500.

Gates, Gibson--affidavit of, 71.

Gee, George Washington--death of and biography, 500 and note.

Geneva, Morgan County, Illinois--stake organized at, 236.

Gifford, Alpheus--biography of, 109-110 and note; death of, 184.

Granger, Gilbert--difficulty in settlement of father's estate, 542.

Granger, Elder Oliver--to provide funds for publication, 18; death of,
408-9.

Green, A.--affidavit of, 65.

Greene, John P.--affidavit of, 65.

Groves, Elisha H.--affidavit of, 68.

H

Harris, George W.--sent on special mission, 161: credentials of, 164.

Hawk, William--affidavit of, 58.

Hayes, Elder Ezra--license taken from, 14.

{614} Hedlock, Elder Reuben--starts on mission for England, 10;
prepares cuts for Book of Abraham, 543.

Haight, Isaac--entertains Elders, 35; assists Elder Brigham Young et
al. on journey, 44.

Higbee, Judge Elias--appointed to go to Washington, 13; attends Prophet
to Washington, 19; letters of concerning case of Saints before United
States Senate, 81, 88, 94, 95; course at Washington approved, 96 _et
seq_.; presides at mass meeting, Nauvoo, 157-60; writes petition to
committee, 237; reproved by the Prophet, 503.

Hinckle, George M.--suit of Prophet against, 423.

Hotchkiss land purchase, 405-408.

Hotchkiss, Horace R.--letter to Prophet, 505-8.

Hunter, Edward--visits Nauvoo, biography of, 416-17 and note.

Hyde Marinda--revelation to, 467.

Hyde, Elder Orson--his allusion to his fall, 2; restored, 12; appointed
on Mission to Jerusalem, 106; credentials of, 112-113; departure of
from Nauvoo for Jerusalem, 114; at conference in Philadelphia, 224;
ditto, New York, 237; reproved, 274; his arrival in Palestine and
dedication of the land for the return of Jews, 454-59; incidents en
route from Palestine to Europe, 496-99.

J

Jews--memorial of to Protestant Powers of Europe and America, 167 and
note; circular of to Israelites of Europe and America, 173-5.

Johnston, Jesse W.--affidavit of, 64.

Johnson, Lyman E.--at Nauvoo, 389.

Jonas, Grand Master Mason--on Nauvoo and the Mormons, 565 _et seq_.

K

Keokuk, Indian chief--visits the Prophet, 401.

Kilbourn, D. W., anti-Mormon--attempts disturbance in Iowa, 416-17;
ditto, 444 and note.

Kimball, Heber C.--departs on mission to England, 9 and note; morphine
given to, 15-16; reports of from England, 182 _et seq_.; dreams of,
203; arrives at Nauvoo from England, 381.

Kiskukosh, Indian chief--visits the Prophet, 401-2.

Knight, Bishop Vinson--appointed Bishop of lower ward, Commerce, 12.

Lathrop, Asahel A.--affidavit of, 65-67.

Latter-day Saints--difference between and Baptists, 348, 350.

Law, William--en route for Nauvoo, 20, and note; appointed member First
Presidency, 284-6.

Legion, Nauvoo--character of, 269; minutes of organization of, 295;
general review of, 236; officers of, 253; general orders to, 354;
defended by the Prophet, 355-6; general orders to, 362; minutes of,
382; general orders, 400; minutes of, 415; general order to, 502;
extract from minutes of, 549; fourth regiment of second cohort of, 582;
_Repast Militaire_ of, 601; general orders to, 601.

Letters--James Mulholland to Isaac Russell, 5-6; Joseph Smith to Isaac
Galland, 8-9; Parley P. Pratt to Prophet, 22; the Prophet to Hyrum
Smith, 29; the Prophet et al. to High Council, Nauvoo, 43-44; Hyrum
Smith to Parley P. Pratt; Hyrum Smith to the Prophet et al., 52:
Charles Adams to Joseph Smith, 53; Orson Pratt to his wife, 54; John B.
Webber to the Prophet, 55; Matthew S. Davis on Prophet's sermon; Elias
Higbee to the Prophet reporting progress {615} in Saints' appeal to
United States Senate, 81; ditto, 83; ditto, 85; ditto, 88; John Taylor,
to the Prophet, 96; R. B. Thompson to Elias Higbee, 96; Horace R.
Hotchkiss to Sidney Rigdon et al., 98; Elias Higbee to the Prophet, 98;
Horace R. Hotchkiss to Joseph Smith, 100; Sidney Rigdon to the Prophet,
102; Hon. Richard W. Young to Elias Higbee, 111; Heber C. Kimball to
the Saints in the United States, 114 _et seq_.; Brigham Young to the
Prophet, 119; Robert Johnson to Senator Young, 121; Senator Young to
Judge Elias Higbee, 121; Wilford Woodruff to Don Carlos Smith, 122;
Elders Hyde and Page to the Prophet, 123; Brigham Young to the Prophet,
125; the Prophet to Elders Hyde and Page, 128; Willard Roberts to the
_Star_, 130; Heber C. Kimball et al. to Bishop at Nauvoo, 132; William
W. Phelps to the Prophet, 141, 142; Hyde and Page to Joseph Smith 142;
Elder Woodruff to the _Star_, 150 _et seq_.; William Barratt to Saints
in England, 161; Prophet to William W. Phelps, 162 _et seq_.; Prophet
to Oliver Granger, 164-7; John C. Bennett to Joseph Smith et al.,
168; ditto, 169; ditto, 172; Prophet to Horace R. Hotchkiss, 170-1;
Wilford Woodruff to the _Star_, 176; the Prophet to John C. Bennett,
177-8; John C. Bennett to Messrs, Smith and Rigdon, 179; Samuel Bent
and George W. Harris to Presidency of Church, 199; John E. Page to
the Presidency, 201; Orson Hyde to Saints in Nauvoo, 202; Heber C.
Kimball et al. to Robinson et al., 220-224; Joseph and Hyrum Smith to
the Saints in Kirtland, 225; the Prophet to the Twelve, 226; Heber
C. Kimball et al. to _Times and Seasons_, 234; a staunch Wesleyan to
the _Manx Liberal_, 234-6; Brigham Young to Presidency, 237; John C.
Bennett to _Times and Seasons_, 248-9; Brigham Young to the Prophet,
251-2; Parley P. Pratt to Sidney Rigdon, 266; Joseph Smith to County
Recorder, 287; Levi Richards to the _Star_, 296; Brigham Young to the
_Star_, 308-9; Wilford Woodruff to Don Carlos Smith, 323-4; George
A. Smith to the _Star_, 343; the Prophet to the _Times and Seasons_,
356-58; R. B. Thompson to _Times and Seasons_, 369-70; Orson Hyde to
Joseph Smith, 372-4; Orson Hyde to Rabbi Hirschel, 374-8; extract
from a letter to the _Juliet Courier_, 380-1; Orson Hyde to President
Smith, 384-88; William Smith, to the Prophet, 391; Horace R. Hotchkiss
to Joseph Smith, 405; the Prophet to Hotchkiss, 406-7; Joseph Smith
to Smith Tuttle, Esq., 430-33; extract from Orson Hyde, 439; Parley
P. Pratt, extract of, 441; Joseph Smith to Reuben McBride, 441; Hyrum
Smith to Saints in Kirtland, 443; Orson Hyde to Parley P. Pratt, 454-9;
the Prophet, to Esq. Browning et al., 468; ditto to Mr. Hotchkiss, 469;
Joseph Smith to Edward Hunter, 481-3; Joseph Smith to Edward Hunter,
491; Orson Hyde to the _Star_, 495-99; Joseph Smith to Isaac Galland,
499; G. Walker to Brigham Young et al., 505-509; Alfred Cordon to
Joseph Smith, 515-16; Joseph Smith to the Church, 517; from the Twelve
to all the churches, 517-18; Joseph Smith on tithing, 518; Robert
Pierce to Joseph Smith, 519; Joseph Smith to John Wentworth, 535 _et
seq_.; Joseph Smith to John C. Bennett, 544; Dr. C. V. Dyer to John C.
Bennett, 544; John C. Bennett to Dr. C. V. Dyer, 545; John C. Bennett
to Joseph {616} Smith, 547; Joseph Smith to Edward Hunter, 548; the
Twelve to the Saints in Europe, 558 _et seq_.; extract from Elder E. P.
Maginn, 566; Lorenzo D. Barlow to Parley P. Pratt, 569.

L

Liberty--religious in Nauvoo, 306, Lima, Adams Co., Illinois--Stake
organized at, 233.

Little, Sidney H., Senator--death of, 389.

Littlefield, Lyman O.--action against for slander, 514.

Litz, Elder A.--suspended from preaching, 501.

Lowry, John--affidavit of, 56.

M

Maginn, Ezekiel--affidavit of, 64.

Marks, Ephraim--funeral of, 586-587.

Marks, William--appointed President of Stake at Commerce, 12; President
of Stake at Nauvoo, 323; financial settlement of Prophet with, 582.

Maughan, Peter--493 and note.

Melling, Peter--ordained a patriarch, first in England, 120 and note;
reports to the Prophet at Nauvoo, 543.

Memorials--of Saints to Senate and House of Representatives, 24 _et
seq_.; to Joseph Smith and High Council at Nauvoo, 136; answer to
foregoing, 138, 141 and note, 144, 145; to Governor Garlin of Illinois
on kidnapping, 159-60.

_Millennial Star_--Latter-day Saints, 119; prospectus of, 122; 133 and
note.

Missouri--action of Legislature on Mormon difficulties, 299 and note.

Modisett, Dr.--gives morphine to Heber C. Kimball, 15; aids Elders
Young and Kimball on journey, 17.

Monmouth, Warren Co., Illinois--the Prophet's trial at, 365 _et seq_.

Moon, Elder John--arrival of with Saints in America, 162.

Morgan, Elizabeth--death of, 551.

Mormon Literature--_pro et con_, 487-489.

Mormons--Nauvoo and the, 565.

Mulholland, James--Prophet's Secretary, writes Isaac Russell, appointed
clerk for land contracts, 16; salary of, 17; death of, 88-9 and note.

N

Nashville, city of--meetings at, 182 and note.

Nauvoo--Agricultural and Manufacturing Association incorporated, 303.

Nauvoo--burying ground for, 353.

Nauvoo, City of--made Post Office at, 121; charters of, 239-249; first
election in, 287; City Council organized, 288; officers of, 292, 308;
divided into wards, 305; concentration at, 362.

Nauvoo--House Association incorporated, 301.

_News_--the prospectus of, 112.

Noble, Joseph Bates--healed by the Prophet, 4 and note.

O

Olney, Elder Oliver--license taken from, 552.

Owen, Ephraim--confession of accepted, 12.

Owen, Jedediah--affidavit of, 56.

P

Page, John E.--one of the Twelve, Address on the Book of Mormon, 2;
appointed on mission to Palestine, 109; reproved, 274, disregards
advice, 372; presides at New York conference, 462-3.

Partridge, Bishop Edward--appointed Bishop upper ward {617} Commerce,
12; instructs Saints on removal to the West, 39.

Perry, Ashael--received into fellowship, 14.

Pettigrew, David--affidavit of, 71-73.

Petition--Elias Higbee, Robert B. Thompson to Congress, 237; presented
to the House, 250-51.

Phelps, Laura, wife of Morris--death of, 513.

Pierce, Robert--business settlement of with the Prophet, 519.

Powell, James--affidavit of, 61.

Pratt, Orson--one of the Twelve, addresses Saints at Nauvoo, 4; starts
on mission for England, 7; opens mission in Edinburg, 120; publishes
_Remarkable Visions_, 224; success in Edinburg, 251; elected Professor
of Mathematics, Nauvoo University, 414.

Pratt, Elder Parley P., one of the Twelve--preaches at Nauvoo, 4;
ditto, 6; starts on mission for England, 7; errors in writings of, 7;
letter to the Prophet, 22; his article on eternal duration of matter,
54, 55 and notes; appointed editor of the _Millennial Star_, 133;
returns to America for family, 177; returns to England, 224.

Presidency, First of Church--report of, 212-14; proclamation of to
the Church scattered abroad, 267-73; report of at General Conference,
336-339.

Priesthood--article on prepared by the Prophet, 207-212; lesser
organized in Nauvoo, 312.

Proclamation--preparation of to Kings, 383.

Q

Quincy, Illinois--a Stake organized at, 233.

R

Ramus, Illinois--minutes of a meeting at, 453; conferences at, 467;
deeds to certain lands of, transferred to the Prophet, 477.

Redfield, Harlow--suspended from office, 12; restored, 16.

Resurrection in general and of children, 553 _et seq_.; and note.

Revelations--to Joseph Smith at Nauvoo, January 19, 1841, 274, _et
seq_.; to William Allred _et al_. 311; to the Saints in Iowa, 311; to
Brigham Young in Nauvoo, July 9, 1841, 382; concerning Nancy Marinda
Hyde, 467; to John Snyder _et al_., 483; to the Twelve, 483; respecting
the _Times and Seasons_, 503.

Rich, Charles C.--elected Brigadier General, 414.

Richards, Levi--affidavit of, 70-71.

Richards, Elder Willard, one of the Twelve--visits Staffordshire,
7; son of dies, 48; on Election and Reprobation, 256-66; assists in
indexing Book of Mormon, 274, 286; writes history of British mission,
313-321; appointed private secretary to the Prophet and Temple
Recorder, 470.

Rigdon, Elder Sidney, counselor to Joseph Smith--address of to Twelve,
2, 3; appointed to accompany Prophet to Washington, 13; starts with
Prophet to Washington, 19; sickness of, left at Columbus, Ohio, 21; in
Washington, 48; in Philadelphia, 76; speech of at laying corner stone
of Nauvoo Temple, 327-29; baptized for in behalf of his parents, 486.

Riggs, Burr--affidavit of, 67.

Roberts, Sidney--excommunicated, 237.

Robinson, Ebenezer--publisher of _Times and Seasons_, 23;
co-partnership with Don Carlos Smith dissolved, 239; editor _Times and
Seasons_, 402.

Rockwell, Orrin P.--starts with Prophet for Washington, 19.

{618} Rogers, D. W.--his hymn-book discarded, 14.

Root, Henry--affidavit of, 62.

Russell, Isaac--reproved, 5, 6; and note.

S

Saints, Latter-day--sickness among at Nauvoo, 3; healing of the, 3,
4 and notes; admonished to set houses in order, 4-5; petition of to
Congress, 24-38.

Sharp, Thomas--editor _Warsaw Signal_, anti-Mormon, the Prophet on, 487
and note.

Sherwood, Henry G.--healed by the Prophet, 4 and note.

Shoemaker, David--affidavit of, 69.

Sloan, James--statement of, 69.

Smith, Don Carlos, brother of the Prophet--President of the High
Priests at Commerce, 12; publisher _Times and Seasons_, 23; dissolves
partnership with Robinson, 239; death of, 393; career of, 393-399.

Smith, Elias--ordained a Bishop, 161.

Smith, Emma, wife of the Prophet appointed to compile hymnbook, 17;
assists husband in labors, 510; appointed President of Female Relief
Society, 552.

Smith, George Albert--one of the Twelve, starts on mission for England,
10; preaches at Richmond, New York, 75: begins out-door preaching in
England, 182 _et seq_.; injures his health at, 236; arrives at Nauvoo
from England, 383; marriage of, 389.

Smith, Hyrum, brother of the Prophet--appointed on committee to
establish Nauvoo. 39; testimony of to Book of Mormon, 46 and note; is
appointed Patriarch of the Church, 229 and note and 282; appointed
Prophet and Revelator, 286.

Smith, Humphery--affidavit of, 62.

Smith, John--affidavit of, 62.

Smith, John--affidavit of, 59.

Smith, Joseph, the Prophet--literary methods of, 1; heals the sick
at Commerce, Nauvoo, 3-5 and notes; ditto, 7; preaches on the "other
Comforter," 10 and note; ditto "Judgments," 11; attends general
conference, Commerce, 11-12 _et seq_.; appointed to represent cause of
the Saints at Washington, 13; starts for Washington, 19; adventure of,
by the way, 23; arrives at Washington, 24; meets President Van Buren,
39 _et seq_.; preaches at Philadelphia, 47; in New Jersey, 49; comment
on Missouri affidavits, 73-4; returns to Washington, 77; description
of by a Congressman, 78 _et seq_.; interview with Martin Van Buren,
80; ditto. John C. Calhoun, 80; returns to Nauvoo, 88-9; reflection of
on actions of Congress, 145; plans charter of Nauvoo, 349; made sole
Trustee-in-trust, of the Church, 287; elected member of the Nauvoo
City Council, 287; introduces several bills in City Council, 293 _et
seq_.; appointed Lieutenant-General of Nauvoo Legion, 309; assists in
laying corner stone Nauvoo Temple, 329-331; arrest of by officers from
Missouri, 364 _et seq_.; visited by Indians at Nauvoo, 401; views on
use of medicine, 414; his experience at Monmouth trial, 419-20; views
on relics of antiquity, 420-21 note; reproves sanctimoniousness, 445;
denunciation of thieves, 461-2; his estimate of the Book of Mormon,
461; proof-reads Book of Mormon, 468; difficulties in keeping daily
journal, 470; proclaims political attitude of the Saints, 479-80 and
notes; his views on the gift of tongues, 485; reflections on opening
of the year, 1842, 492; debates race question, 501; purpose of debates
in Nauvoo, 514; views on privileges of Nauvoo {619} charter, 516;
settlement of with Robert Pierce, 519; settlement of taxes with Mr.
Bagley, 542; becomes editor of _Times and Seasons_, 551; sermon on
"Life, Death, and Resurrection," 553 _et seq_. and note 556; remarks
of at funeral of Edward Marks, 587; reproof of unvirtuous persons by
587-88; insolvency of, 594; cause of Prophet's insolvency, 600; remarks
respecting: signs and key words received in the Temple, 608.

Smith, Joseph, Sen.--death of, 189; biography of, 189 _et seq_.;
funeral services of, 191-97; benediction of, on Hyrum Smith, 229 and
note.

Smith, Samuel--affidavit of, 60.

Smith, William, brother of the Prophet--allowed to retain standing in
quorum of the Twelve, 12.

Snow, Erastus, labors of in Salem, 433.

Snow, Lorenzo--sent to England, 161-2 and note; arrives at Manchester,
233; in public discussion with Mr. Barker, 234.

Snyder, Elder John--appointed a mission, 503-504; set apart and
instructed, 568.

Spirits, try the, 571-581.

Springfield, Illinois--a Stake organized at, 236.

T

Taylor, Elder John, one of the Twelve Apostles--testimony of to Book
of Mormon, 2; preaches at Kirtland, 21; sails for England, 46; arrives
at Preston, England, 76; leaves Liverpool for Ireland, 170 and note;
in the Isle of Man, 234-6 and note; discussion with Rev. Robert Hayes,
238; reports baptisms, 288; arrives at Nauvoo from England, 381;
appointed editor _Times and Seasons_, 513.

Temple, Nauvoo--corner stones of laid, 327-331; announcement of
Trust-in-trust respecting, 517; word of the Twelve respecting, 517;
progress of building the, 608 _et seq_.

Thompson, Elder Robert B.--delivers discourse at the funeral of Joseph
Smith, Sen., 191-197; writes petition to Congress, 237; Associate
editor _Times and Seasons_, 353: death of and biography of, 411-412.

Times and Seasons--first number of, 23.

Tithing, arrangements for reception of, 493; record of, 518.

_Tribune_, New York--criticism of on the course of Missouri, 551.

Trustee-in-trust--sole for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints, see Joseph Smith.

Turley, Elder Theodore--starts for England on mission, 10; imprisonment
of, 127.

U

University of City of Nauvoo, 243, and 301.

V

Van Buren, President of the United States--Joseph Smith's interview
with, 40, 80, 89 and note.

W

Walker, Cyrus--lawyer, counselor for the Prophet, at Monmouth trial,
367 _et seq_.

Walker, Oliver--before High Council, Nauvoo, 219-20.

Warren, city of, 405; consultation respecting, 486.

_Wasp_, The--first number, 600.

Wentworth, John--letter of Prophet to, 535 _et seq_.

Wells, Squire Daniel H.--biography, 154-55.

{620} Whitney, Bishop Newel K.--appointed Bishop middle ward, Commerce.

Wight, Lyman--addresses conference, 13.

Wilber, Brother--assists Elder Young _et al_., 11.

Williams; Frederick G.--affidavit of, 69.

Witter, Daniel S.--course of respecting settlement at Warren, 470-1.

Wood, Elder Daniel--suspended from preaching, 501; vindication of, 514.

Woodruff, Elder Wilford, one of the Twelve--his account of miraculous
healings at Commerce by the Prophet, 3-5; notes; sent by the Prophet to
heal the sick, 5; departure of for England, 46; arrives in England, 76;
labors of in England, 182 _et seq_.; mission on Fox Island, 418-19.

Women, The character of Mormon, 568.

World, The--commotions in, 125, 189, 252-3, and 383, 401, 415.

Yokum, William, Haun's Mill victim, 389.

Y

Young, Elder Brigham, one of the Twelve Apostles--remarks of at Nauvoo,
2; starts for England, 9; arrival of at Cleveland, Ohio, 20; rebukes
storm, 23; preaches at Richmond, New York, 75; arrival in New York, 77;
embarks with four others of the Twelve for England, 94; arrival of in
England, 102; farewell of the Saints to, 103; sustained as President
of the Twelve, 115 and notes; also 146, and note; on Election and
Reprobation, 256-66; assists in indexing Book of Mormon, 274 and 286;
arrives at Nauvoo from England, 381; elected to Nauvoo Council, 414.

Young, John, Sen.--father of Brigham, dies, 14.

Young, Joseph, President of the Seventies, grants licenses, 501.

Young, Lorenzo, assists Young and Kimball _en route_ for England, 11.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of History of the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints (Vol. 4), by Joseph Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF CHURCH LATTER-DAY SAINTS, VOL 4 ***

***** This file should be named 60708-8.txt or 60708-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/7/0/60708/

Produced by the Mormon Texts Project (http://mormontextsproject.org)
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

